A Perfect Day
6.8
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISBenicio Del Toro shambling around like a latter-day Robert Mitchum is the best reason to see “A Perfect Day.” A serviceable, watchable movie set someplace in the Balkans in 1995, this oddity was shot in Spain and features a tight, largely English-speaking cast — including the American veteran Tim Robbins, and two European actresses, Mélanie Thierry and Olga Kurylenko — that seems to have been tapped to reach as many film markets as possible. This talent sampler fits the movie, which primarily registers as a would-be business opportunity for investment types.Mr. Del Toro plays Mambrú, an international aid worker who tools around the Balkan countryside trying to help locals while also doing his best to stay alive. His primary comrade in battleground salvage jobs is B (Mr. Robbins), a character whose cynical yuks suggest that someone here read Kurt Vonnegut’s “Slaughterhouse-Five” at an impressionable age. Mr. Robbins tosses around his lines with amiable lightness, like the professional he is. But he’s basically stuck performing second-banana duties for Mr. Del Toro, who dominates the movie with his innate je ne sais quoi-ness, a loose gestural performance and nice slow burns that never quite ignite a much-needed fire.There’s not much of a story, which wouldn’t be bad if there was something other than blasts of music filling the longueurs. The action, such as it is, involves Mambrú; B; a humorless new recruit, Sophie (Ms. Thierry); and their interpreter, Damir (Fedja Stukan), driving around doing good works. The corpse that early on they try and fail to haul out of a village well becomes the movie’s guiding visual idea, one that the filmmakers return to several times, though the resonance of this bloated body remains fuzzy. The dead weigh heavily on this land? Humanitarian efforts like Mambrú’s are doomed to failure? One lesson is that these aid workers need to carry better, stronger rope.Directed by “A Perfect Day” is rated R (under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Guns and trauma. Running time: 1 hour 46 minutes.





A version of this review appears in print on January 15, 2016, on Page C14 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;