Frozen
7.6
AdvertisementBy STEPHEN HOLDENA beautiful princess with magical powers that she can’t control; an adorable snowman, with buck teeth and a carrot for a nose, who longs to sunbathe because no one ever told him that heat melts ice; a picture-perfect prince who is revealed to be a scheming, opportunistic cad.Those are among the unconventional characters in the new Disney 3-D animated movie musical, Allegorically, “Frozen” lacks the purity and elemental power of a classic myth like “Beauty and the Beast,” but at least its storytelling is fairly coherent, and its gleaming dream world of snow and ice is one of the most visually captivating environments to be found in a Disney animated film. There are moments when you may feel that you are inside a giant crystal chandelier frosted with diamonds.It all takes place in the fictional Scandinavian land of Arendelle, whose king and queen die in a shipwreck, leaving the country in the hands of Elsa (the voice of Idina Menzel), the elder of two daughters. This blond, high-strung princess has a secret problem. If she isn’t extremely careful, everything around her freezes when she takes off her protective gloves and waves her hands. Elsa’s best friend is her impulsive redheaded younger sister, Anna (The sisters become estranged when Anna falls in love at first sight with Hans (Santino Fontana), a too-good-to-be-true prince from a neighboring kingdom, and Elsa forbids them to marry. With one wave of Elsa’s hand, eternal winter descends on Arendelle. She is so horrified by her destructive gift that she retreats to a remote ice palace atop a mountain.The Times critic Stephen Holden reviews "Frozen."As Arendelle suffers through the deep freeze, the resourceful Anna, who still loves her sister, is determined to track down Elsa, who she believes can reverse the spell. Thus begin Anna’s adventures in mountain climbing. Along the way, she meets Kristoff (Jonathan Groff), a rugged ice dealer who guides a reindeer-driven sleigh. During their “Wizard of Oz”-like quest, they are joined by Olaf (“Frozen,” for all its innovations, is not fundamentally revolutionary. Its animated characters are the same familiar, blank-faced, big-eyed storybook figures. But they are a little more psychologically complex than their Disney forerunners. Its princesses may gaze at a glass ceiling, but most are not ready to shatter it.AdvertisementIs it significant that Jennifer Lee, who directed “Frozen” with Chris Buck, is billed as the first female director of a Disney animated feature film? Perhaps. Ms. Lee is credited as the screenwriter of a story that she and Mr. Buck developed with Shane Morris. That screenplay cautiously incorporates some slangy contemporary argot, but its tone is never desperately hip in the manner of the “Shrek” movies. Most of what fun there is revolves around Olaf, a classic Disney sidekick.If “Frozen” still has one foot planted in 19th-century children’s literature, good and evil are not so clear-cut. The title character of the original fairy tale was evil. Her 21st-century descendant is merely confused and scared. As always, love is the solution to everything. When nothing can thaw the icy heart of the frightened Elsa, love does the trick, but in this case it is sisterly loyalty and devotion rather than romantic attachment.“Frozen” has eight original songs by So he’s a bit of a fixer-upper,So he’s got a few flaws.Like his peculiar brain-dear.His thing with the reindeer.That’s a little outside of nature’s laws!It can’t be accidental that “Frozen,” with its two female leads, one voiced by the original Elphaba in “Wicked” (Ms. Menzel), has a lot in common with that Broadway juggernaut and seems ready-made for theatrical adaptation. For this journey, instead of a broomstick, take mittens, snow boots and steaming hot chocolate.“Frozen” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested) for some action and mild, rude humor.





A version of this review appears in print on November 27, 2013, on Page C9 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;