Hacksaw Ridge
8.6
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTMel GibsonThat hero, And also in graphic and gruesome detail. Mr. Gibson’s appetite for gore is without equal in modern Hollywood. Maybe that’s saying a lot, or maybe it goes without saying, but the man is an aficionado — a connoisseur, an epicure, a gourmand — of exploding heads, shattered limbs and burst abdomens. As he did most famously in “The Passion of the Christ,” he once again plunges a man of peace into a charnel house of cruelty, testing the fortitude of protagonist and audience alike.A preview of the film.“Hacksaw Ridge” opens with a taste of hell, a battleground that belongs more in a horror movie than in a combat picture. Rupert Gregson-Williams’s jarring, minor-key score plays under a slow-motion tableau of spurting blood, splintering bones, burning flesh and general agony.AdvertisementThen the music changes, the light shifts, and we are in paradise: a hilly, pastoral corner of Virginia years before Pearl Harbor. Young Desmond (Darcy Bryce) and his brother, Hal (Roman Guerriero), chase each other over rocks and streams. Not that they dwell in a perfect Eden. There is a whiff of Cain and Abel in their relationship, and more serious trouble from their father, Tom (Hugo Weaving), a bitter, alcoholic World War I veteran. Though he hates war, the elder Doss is hardly a pacifist, and his violent behavior toward his sons and their mother (Rachel Griffiths) helps push Desmond toward peace-loving piety.AdvertisementPlayed as a young man by When Desmond arrives at basic training, he is introduced to a platoon whose composition — one guy from Brooklyn, another from Texas, a Pole, an Italian, a pretty boy and a hothead — would have looked corny back in the ’40s. And let’s not forget Sarge, a fountain of colorful insults played by Vince Vaughn, who stands out among the mostly Australian and British cast members for his effortlessly flat vowels and the equal effortlessness of his scene-stealing.The Times critic A. O Scott reviews “Hacksaw Ridge.”Sarge does not much care for Desmond. Neither does his commander, Captain Glover (Sam Worthington). Desmond’s refusal to bear arms strikes these officers as a potential threat to morale, and they try to get rid of him — encouraging the other soldiers to harass and beat him, trying to arrange a psychiatric discharge and finally convening a court-martial. This parade of indignities leads to scenes of quiet defiance; a few rousing, tear-streaked speeches; and a bit of mildly interesting philosophical reflection. Mr. Gibson is too impatient to linger over the nuances of patriotic duty and religious devotion. He and the screenwriters, Robert Schenkkan and Andrew Knight, are content to remind us that both are very important. Then it’s time to get back to Okinawa and deal with the Japanese Army.Ever since “Saving Private Ryan,” Hollywood has been eager to revisit And “Hacksaw Ridge” uses the moral dilemma of its hero — who is sometimes tempted to forsake his vows and pick up a rifle in the heat of battle — as a pretext for its own ethical sleight of hand. The film pretends to be a grim reckoning with the horrors of war, but it is also, true to its genre, a rousing celebration of the thrills of battle. Desmond Doss was calm, humble and courageous, qualities Mr. Gibson honors but does not share. It is possible to be moved and inspired by Desmond’s exploits while still feeling that his convictions have been exploited, perhaps even betrayed.“Hacksaw Ridge” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Blood, guts and period-appropriate racial slurs and tobacco use. 





A version of this review appears in print on November 2, 2016, on Page C5 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;