A Good Day to Die Hard
5.3
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTT“It’s not 1986 anymore,” a sneering Russian villain (one of several in McClane is in no position to argue at just that moment, though you can be sure he will have the last word. (It’s not “Yippee ki-yay,” which is reserved for a different Russian villain and which has somehow joined Back then McClane was an avatar of embattled American masculinity, a regular working stiff whose essential good humor was challenged by Japanese corporations, bureaucratic red tape, feminism and a nasty Euro-nihilist with a fancy suit and a silky accent. That those days are gone is signaled by the portrait of Barack Obama on the wall of the shooting range where we first encounter McClane in this movie, the fifth in the series.McClane himself has evolved from angry Everyman to weary, worried dad. He travels to Moscow to help his son, Jack (Jai Courtney), who at first looks like a bad seed but turns out to be a chip off the old block. Some dads take their boys fishing or to the ballgame or to a movie like this one, but the McClanes prefer a more primal form of bonding — killing miscreants, though Pop McClane uses a more evocative word.And there is never a shortage. The cold war may be a fading memory, and C.I.A. superspies (like the younger McClane) may have displaced big-city cops (like his dad) in the pop-culture pantheon. But this off-the-shelf blend of car chases, fireballs and the rat-a-tat, thunk-a-thunk of automatic weapons fire is not likely to go out of style. Style, sad to say, is precisely what is missing from “A Good Day to Die Hard,” the latest entry in the flourishing geezer-action genre. Directed by John Moore (AdvertisementIt’s hard to hear the words over the noise of weapons, vehicles and Marco Beltrami’s bludgeoning score, but I’m pretty sure that McClane refers to a beautiful Russian woman named Irina (Yulia Snigir) as Though it will most likely scare up some domestic business in the pre-Oscar lull (happy Valentine’s Day!), “A Good Day to Die Hard” is squarely aimed at the overseas marketplace. About a third of the dialogue is already subtitled, and the rest would take a competent translator about 15 minutes to render.The movie’s real idiom is the Esperanto of violence — sex is a more culturally sensitive issue, so there’s none of that — and sweaty machismo. Mr. Willis himself is something of a universal language, or at least a popular international brand. There’s a newish This is what the new global cinema looks like. The special effects sequences are put together with some ingenuity, though the last one (spoiler alert: Mr. Willis drives a truck off the back of a helicopter in Chernobyl) shows signs of sloppy digital overkill. But everything that made the first “Die Hard” memorable — the nuances of character, the political subtext, the cowboy wit — has been dumbed down or scrubbed away entirely. I’m not saying I wish it was the ’80s again — or maybe I am. If that makes me a grumpy old man, it’s John McClane’s fault.“A Good Day to Die Hard” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Yippee ki-yay, my friends.





A version of this review appears in print on February 14, 2013, on Page C8 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;