The Hobbit: The Battle of the Five Armies
7.4
AdvertisementBy NICOLAS RAPOLDA preview of the film.“You are only quite a little fellow in a wide world, after all,” Gandalf reminds his companion at the end of “The Hobbit: The Battle of the Five Armies.” The avuncular line has a cozy feel that evokes the bedtime-storytelling of J. R. R. Tolkien’s 1937 children’s classic — now better known as the trilogized prequel to “The Hobbit: The Battle of the Five Armies” follows hot on the heels of There, the headstrong leader Thorin Oakenshield will install himself in hoarding splendor, a slave to “that terrible need” for treasure. And so on, and so forth. Part of the problem with Mr. Jackson’s accordion-expanded “Hobbit” is just that gravitational pull: At the film’s core is not really the engaging Mr. Freeman as Bilbo, ever twitchingly alive, as you might expect. Instead, the story insists upon the hoary sentiment of filthy lucre’s overriding all reason and friendship, like an opera without song. Erebor is an imposing castlelike (or cathedral-like) stronghold, containing Thorin like a crazed Macbeth in the labyrinth of his desire, but outside, the gathering of armies feels like a hurry-up-and-wait stage setting by another cast of computer-generated thousands.AdvertisementWhen the Dwarfs, Elves and Orcs — those dumpy, evil forces that appear constantly to need the direction from their rabble-rousing leaders to go forth and “slay them all” — finally engage, Mr. Jackson’s massed set pieces shift between stirring visual salvos and general panoramic swarming. It’s only as individual good guys peel off for death-defying face-offs with Orcs on ledges that the routine violence crackles again with genuine danger and deft showmanship.What this adaptation of “The Hobbit” can’t avoid by its final installment is its predictability and hollow foundations. It’s been said before, but Mr. Jackson himself is still haunted by the past: For all the craft, there’s nothing here like the unity and force of “The Lord of the Rings,” which is positively steeped in mythology and features (wonder of wonders) rounder characterization than the scheduled revelations on display here. At times Mr. Jackson expects too much audience investment, whether in a perfunctory forbidden love between the elf Tauriel (Evangeline Lilly) and the dwarf Kili (Aidan Turner), or in the weak comic relief of a grabby Lake-town deputy who illustrates further venality.It’s especially a shame since Mr. Jackson’s original knack for world building (not to mention the sense of humor in his early films) is often missing in the ever-proliferating superhero-franchise worlds that his own vastly successful endeavors no doubt helped encourage. Bilbo may fully learn a sense of friendship and duty, and have quite a story to tell, but somewhere along the way, Mr. Jackson loses much of the magic.“The Hobbit: The Battle of the Five Armies” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Extended sequences of intense fantasy action violence, per the title.





A version of this review appears in print on December 17, 2014, on Page C6 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;