Law Abiding Citizen
7.4
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTT“Law Abiding Citizen,”But really, “Law Abiding Citizen” has about as much to say about real-life legal issues as “Transformers 2: Revenge of the Fallen” had to say about defense policy. And it has less ethical gravity than any three of the Nick Rice, Mr. Foxx’s character, is slick and ambitious, proud of his 96 percent conviction rate and quite sure that he’s the cleverest and coolest person in the room. This does not seem like much of a stretch for Mr. Foxx, who is cashing in on his Oscar rather than going after a second one. Mr. Butler, for his part, displays a surliness that many in Hollywood seem to mistake for charisma, and suffers the anguish of violent bereavement as if it were an annoying gastrointestinal ailment.His character, Clyde Shelton, returns 10 years after the death of his family to tie up some loose ends. He dispatches the thugs, willingly goes to prison and starts doing dinner theater Hannibal Lecter for Mr. Foxx’s benefit. “Some lessons must be learned in blood,” Clyde declares, one of many portentous proverbs that he seems to have learned during his career as a military killing-gizmo specialist.The details of his job history are revealed, during a secret meeting in a tunnel somewhere, late in the movie. But don’t think I’ve spoiled anything. By the time I saw “Law Abiding Citizen,” I had already seen the trailer four or five times. Another 40 viewings would have added up to the running time of the whole film, without much loss of pleasure or nuance.AdvertisementWell, that’s not entirely true. Most of the fun in the feature-length “Law Abiding Citizen” comes not from the cleverly rigged explosions and bloodlettings — including one unleashed by a robot in a cemetery — but rather from the game and gifted supporting cast, who are not featured in the two-minute trailer version.Colm Meaney, Leslie Bibb and Bruce McGill are all much better than they need to be, as is Viola Davis in a few scenes as the mayor of Philadelphia, where this bloodbath takes place. You can’t help regretting that some of their characters will meet fiery or bloody ends. On the other hand,  the actors were no doubt paid well for their suffering.“Law Abiding Citizen” is rated R. It has a lot of grisly and sometimes imaginative violence and some swearing too. LAW ABIDING CITIZENOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by F. Gary Gray; written by Kurt Wimmer; director of photography, Jonathan Sela; edited by Tariq Anwar; production designer, Alex Hajdu; produced by WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on October 16, 2009, on Page C6 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;