American Sniper
7.3
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTAs a young boy, which is to say before he grows up into a burly, bearded It’s a tough, stark view of the order of things, one that guides Chris in his subsequent career as a Navy SEAL sniper and one that has, with some modification, informed much of the work of A scene from the film.The real-life merits of this idea are arguable, to say the least. As an ethical touchstone or a political principle, it certainly has its dangers. But a lot of great movies, including several of Mr. Cooper keeps a lid on his natural, mischievous charm without entirely suppressing it. His Chris Kyle is a loyal friend and a brave warrior, but Mr. Cooper and Mr. Eastwood, working from a script by Jason Hall, decline to make him a saint. Some of the liveliest and most memorable scenes in “American Sniper” are celebrations of the profane, aggressive humor and endless teasing that men in combat deploy to relieve the tension. Chris’s courtship and marriage — to Taya, played by Mostly, though, we are in Iraq, where Chris Kyle served four tours of duty, racking up 160 confirmed kills. He approaches his work with steady nerves and a clear conscience, banishing the doubt and fatalism that afflict some of his comrades and buttressed by the unambiguous depravity of his enemies. These are people who use women and children as suicide bombers, who mutilate and torture anyone who opposes them, who ambush American Marines in the street. Giving them cover is Chris’s nemesis and sinister doppelgänger, a shadowy sharpshooter rumored to be a Syrian Olympic medalist.Remorse is out of the question, which is not to say that Chris doesn’t suffer. (AdvertisementOr, you might say, its commitment to printing his legend. “Legend” is one of the nicknames Chris earns from his admiring fellow servicemen, who are in awe of his bravery and skill, and Mr. Eastwood engages in his share of mythmaking. This is less a matter of the way he tells the true story than in the way he edits the history in which it is embedded. Terrorist attacks on United States Embassies in 1998 inspired Chris to enlist, and his resolve is fortified when he sees the World Trade Center collapse on Sept. 11, 2001. In Iraq, his foes are identified only and repeatedly as Al Qaeda.The politics of the Iraq war are entirely absent, which is a political statement in its own right. And though George W. Bush’s name is never invoked, “American Sniper” can be seen as an expression of nostalgia for his Manichaean approach to foreign policy. It can equally — and this may amount to the same thing — be seen as upholding the Hollywood western tradition of turning complicated historical events and characters into fables and heroes. In other words, it’s only a movie.“American Sniper” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Intense combat and rough language. 





A version of this review appears in print on December 25, 2014, on Page C12 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;