Cowboys & Aliens
7.2
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISGalloping across the desert, his inscrutable baby blues fixed on the horizon, Daniel Craig makes for a surprisingly convincing cowboy. Some actors, including a few in his new movie, He does, eventually, though it takes the director, That these new beasties even evoke the nightmarish creatures originally created by the artist The movie is distilled from a comic-book world cooked up by AdvertisementAs Jake, Mr. Craig happily doesn’t need to say much at first, entering in near-Daniel-Day-Lewis mysterioso silence, popping into the frame as if waking from a nightmare. He’s bloodied and dazed, but his bearings return as soon as he’s set upon by bandits whom he quickly disarms, unpants and deboots. He makes his way to a town where he finds a preacher, Meacham (Clancy Brown), who sews up a weird wound for him, and takes on a drunk, Percy (Paul Dano), who makes the saloonkeeper-sawbones, Doc (Sam Rockwell), dance by gunfire. And, in the role of AdvertisementJust around the time that the sleepy town threatens to become sleepier, a cluster of small spaceships zips out of the nighttime sky, simultaneously laying waste to the area and stirring your interest. (An earlier, visually obscured attack turns some cattle and their keepers into barbecue.) It’s an effectively staged, attention-grabbing scene, with the ships darting in and out of the darkness, smoke and fireball bursts, as the panicked, shrieking citizenry zigzags below. Amid the clamor there’s a nice pocket of relative quiet when Jake, who’s been detained, suddenly realizes that the strange, metallic bracelet locked on his left wrist has a purpose, an epiphany that turns him into a cowboy with a zap gun.Soon after Jake figures it out, though, townsfolk have been snatched by the aliens, yanked up by long, tentaclelike appendages that flick out of the spaceships and seize prey as easily as frogs gobble flies. If you’ve seen a few cinematic oaters or just about any them-vs.-us movie, you know what happens next: Strangers join forces as they take off after the villains, who just happen to be extraterrestrials, but might as well be Russians or Nazis, given their bland back story. There is one surprise that nearly saves a laughable character and some wishful thinking with some super-accommodating Apaches that, even in the service of a cinematic fantasy, rankles. As the cattleman, Mr. Ford’s presence, along with that of Steven Spielberg (he’s an executive producer) makes you wonder what Mr. Spielberg would have done with this material, though maybe the better question is what Mr. Favreau would have done differently without him. “Cowboys &amp; Aliens” is, with “Super 8,” yet another summer release Mr. Spielberg has blessed with his imprimatur, perhaps not to the advantage of either. (His name is also on the latest “Transformers,” but let us not speak of that.) It isn’t just that he is a veritable genre and brings a legacy and specific filmmaking ideas with him; it’s also that J. J. Abrams, who directed “Super 8,” and Mr. Favreau, each a pop adept, have skewed heavier and less loose with the Great Man on board, as if awed by his genius instead of his early gift for fun.“Cowboys &amp; Aliens” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Generally bloodless violence and some mild cussing. COWBOYS &amp; ALIENSOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by WITH: Daniel Craig (Jake Lonergan), 





A version of this review appears in print on July 29, 2011, on Page C4 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;