Learning to Drive
6.4
AdvertisementBy STEPHEN HOLDENAmong the charms of “Wendy Shields (Ms. Clarkson) is a high-strung Manhattan literary star whose marriage explodes when her husband, Ted (Jake Weber), abruptly leaves her for another woman. Adapted from an essay in In the concise, droll screenplay by Sarah Kernochan (“Impromptu,” “9 ½ Weeks”), the seven-year relationship described in Ms. Pollitt’s essay has become a 21-year marriage, the better to illustrate the chasm between Indian and American marital customs and to suggest that the American ideal of unlimited personal freedom has its price.Wendy is an upper-middle-class woman of letters with a highbrow reputation. One of her saddest realizations when abandoned is that her marriage might have lasted had her passion for literature not taken precedence. This is the rare film that conveys the intense, private experience of the dedicated reader.Like many longtime New Yorkers, Wendy has relied on public transportation. Only when her marriage ends does she realize that she has to learn to drive if she wants to visit her fiery college-age daughter, Tasha (Grace Gummer), on a farm in Vermont.A scene from the film.Her driving teacher, Darwan (Mr. Kingsley), is a Sikh Indian and part-time cabdriver who shares a drab Queens apartment with fellow Indian immigrants, some of whom are in the country illegally. There is a raid in which several roommates are chased out of the house. In India, Darwan was a university professor, imprisoned for his religious beliefs. He won political asylum in the United States.Wherever he goes, Darwan, conspicuous in his turban, faces possible harassment. When Wendy, flustered and fearful behind the wheel, damages another vehicle, Darwan is assumed by the police to be responsible until Wendy steps in. The chemistry between Darwan and Wendy has an unspoken romantic subtext, but the attraction never bursts into flame. AdvertisementMr. Kingsley’s penetrating brown-eyed gaze can project everything from pure evil to near-divinity, and in “Learning to Drive,” his demeanor is benign but not holy. With his stiff-backed posture and alert expression, he projects an unflappable self-control, even when Wendy has a near-meltdown on the Queensboro Bridge. His lessons in patience and concentration convey a calm, farsighted perspective steeped in Eastern philosophy.Darwan is about to enter into an arranged marriage with Jasleen (Sarita Choudhury), a Sikh woman of whom he knows next to nothing beyond that they were born in neighboring villages. With Jasleen, as with Wendy, he is stern but polite, persistent but not authoritarian. Even when he realizes, to his disappointment, that Jasleen is uneducated, speaks poor English and is scared to leave the house, his frustration never boils over.Moments of humor gently tilt “Learning to Drive” toward comedy. In the wittiest scene, a blind date that turns into a one-night stand leaves Wendy wrung out after a protracted session of tantric sex. Such little detours add a lighthearted gloss to a delicate film that steers clear of preaching or of slipping into mawkishness.“Learning to Drive” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Strong language and some sexual content. 





A version of this review appears in print on August 21, 2015, on Page C6 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;