Click
6.4
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISHaving conquered youngish love in Mr. Sandler's talents are certainly modest, but the success of films like "Click" more or less follows the usual template: Mr. Sandler stars as Michael Newman, an up-and-coming architect with a pert, pretty wife, Donna (Kate Beckinsale), and two button-cute young children, Ben and Samantha, each of whom is played by three different actors, for reasons that will soon become clear. The story takes off after Michael, while searching for a universal remote control to simplify his chaotic life, wanders into a Bed, Bath and Beyond, where he meets a freaky salesclerk, Morty, with lightning bolts blazing off his head (who else? Christopher Walken). Morty of course understands that what today's harried white-collar family man needs is no ordinary remote, which is how Michael ends up with a device that allows him to hopscotch through time.While some people might use a time-traveling device to, say, get the real scoop on weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, Michael uses it to turn the volume down on his dog and his wife, the two being more or less interchangeable irritants, at least storywise. He also rewinds to high school and to several earlier cringe-worthy incidents involving his parents (Henry Winkler and Julie Kavner, each wearing some grotesque facial prosthetics). In a sop to the film's target audience, he also uses the remote to reduce the speed of a female jogger so he can watch the health-conscious blonde's generously proportioned breasts bounce slowly, slowly, up and down, an effect that would have been impossible if this ambulatory eye candy had been wearing the proper brassiere.Breasts are big, so to speak, in "Click." When Michael fast-forwards to what turns out to be a fairly dark future — it's a wonderful life, not — he does a double take at the similarly bountiful profile of his now-adult daughter (Katie Cassidy) and orders her to put on a sweater, apparently as much for his sake as hers.AdvertisementMichael arrives at this epiphanic moment after the story takes several abrupt turns into thornier terrain involving roads unwisely taken. Following the lead tendered by the credited screenwriters, Steve Koren and Mark O'Keefe, the director Frank Coraci struggles to push the character toward the kind of age-appropriate complexity lost on Mr. Sandler, forgetting that his star only works when, as all those ponderous bosoms  suggest, he's un-weaned. "Click" is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It's the kind of potty-mouthed movie that's one expletive shy of an R.ClickOpens today nationwide. Directed by Frank Coraci; written by Steve Koren and Mark O'Keefe; director of photography, Dean Semler; edited by Jeff Gourson; music by Rupert Gregson-Williams; production designer, Perry Andelin Blake; produced by Adam Sandler, Jack Giarraputo, Neal H. Moritz, Mr. Koren and Mr. O'Keefe; released by Columbia Pictures. Running time: 98 minutes.WITH: Adam Sandler (Michael Newman), Kate Beckinsale (Donna Newman), Christopher Walken (Morty), Henry Winkler (Ted), David Hasselhoff (Ammer), Julie Kavner (Trudy), Jennifer Coolidge (Janine) and Sean Astin (Bill).





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page E12 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;