Barbershop: The Next Cut
5.9
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTMovie sequels don’t need — and frequently don’t have — a good reason to exist, other than to take more money from fans. “Barbershop: The Next Cut,” which revives a popular comedy franchise, has plenty of commercial appeal, not least as a kind of hip-hop all-star acting revue, with Common, Tyga and Nicki Minaj joining The Times critic A. O. Scott reviews ‘Barbershop: The Next Cut.’The last feature in the series, Directed by Get recommendations on the best TV shows and films to stream and watch.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.“Barbershop: The Next Cut” is crowded with subplots and characters. Some seem to be there for purely comic purposes, like One-Stop (J. B. Smoove), an all-purpose, motor-mouthed entrepreneur, and Jerrod (Lamorne Morris), the requisite workplace goofball. Love trouble erupts when Draya (Ms. Minaj) starts flirting in earnest with Rashad (Common), who is married to Terri (Eve). J. D. (Anthony Anderson) is promoting his for-profit catering business as a nonprofit community service project.AdvertisementBut most of this narrative business exists to provide diversion from — and occasions for — a series of wide-ranging, open-ended arguments. These are often very funny, studded with sharp put-downs and Eddie’s woolly non sequiturs. This installment follows its predecessors in declaring the barbershop a piety-free zone. Anything and anyone can be made into a punch line: Bill Cosby, R. Kelly, Michelle Obama’s hips, Black Lives Matter. It’s pretty much guaranteed that you will take offense at some point, but also that you will be able to laugh off your discomfort and move on.And, above all, to think about what’s being said. Debate topics include President Obama’s legacy, sexism, child-rearing techniques, the different experiences of immigrants and African-Americans, among many others. There are also deeper, more complicated issues in play, contradictions that emerge through the story of Calvin’s struggle to understand and protect his son. Like all the other “Barbershop” movies, this one rests on a bedrock of conservative values: It’s a celebration of small business, hard work, family ties and communal solidarity. But it also resists the easy comforts of respectability politics and bootstrap ideology.AdvertisementThe most fascinating — and the most moving — thing about this sprawling, sincere and boisterous movie is its tone. I don’t just mean that it is able to acknowledge real personal and social anguish amid all the joking and banter. In that regard, Mr. Lee shares with Spike Lee an ability to blend the rough with the smooth, to tickle and provoke in a single gesture. In this case, the collision of humor and horror makes a humanist point. Even when terrible things are happening, people will still find time for petty complaints and ordinary pleasures. Nothing can stop us from teasing, flirting or worrying about how we look.Viewed from one angle, “Barbershop: The Next Cut” can seem like a terribly sad film, an expression of fatigue that verges on despair. How can it be that young black men are still dying in such numbers, and that so many neighborhoods are in the grip of fear and alienation? There are plenty of theories, but no good answer.Yet the film, as if obeying both the imperatives of Hollywood comedy and the long tradition of black activism, refuses to succumb to pessimism. Instead of a political position, it offers a potent metaphor for political participation. At the end, Calvin expresses his faith that, “eventually,” Chicago will pull itself together. That might sound like nothing more than wishful thinking — a thin reed of formulaic faith — if the movie had not already supplied solid grounds for hope in the shape of the barbershop itself. It’s a room full of men and women who agree on almost nothing, except their commitment to the place that gives structure and purpose to their lives. Everyone is welcome, and everyone is challenged and improved. In other words, it’s what democracy looks like.“Barbershop: The Next Cut” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Some rough language, but that’s what democracy sounds like. Running time: 1 hour 51 minutes.





A version of this review appears in print on April 15, 2016, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;