Prisoners
8.1
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTThe director Denis Villeneuve narrates a scene from his film featuring Jake Gyllenhaal and Hugh Jackman.Violence against children strikes most people as a uniquely terrible phenomenon, which may be why filmmakers are so fond of it. Nothing sparks a revenge plot, or allows a director to trade intellectual nuance for visceral feeling, quite as efficiently as a child in peril. When dealing with people who gratuitously cause the innocent to suffer, no retribution seems too extreme, and the history of movies is full of good men (and a few women) driven to righteous brutality against predators, kidnappers and abusers.Keller Dover, the enraged, grief-addled father played by The Times critic A. O. Scott reviews "Prisoners."But if “Prisoners,” written by Aaron Guzikowski, upholds some of the conventions of the angry-dad revenge drama, it also subverts them in surprising, at times devastating ways. The easy catharsis of righteous payback is complicated at every turn, and pain and uncertainty spread like spilled oil on an asphalt road.When the girls, Anna and Joy, go missing late on Thanksgiving afternoon, suspicion focuses on the driver of a camper that had been parked in their small-town Pennsylvania neighborhood. An arrest is made of a young man (AdvertisementIt’s all very creepy and mysterious, and “Prisoners” is, among other things, a satisfying whodunit, with artfully deposited clues and twists that are surprising without entirely undermining the film’s naturalistic credibility.But Mr. Villeneuve, a French Canadian director whose previous movies include AdvertisementLike Keller, a survivalist with a basement full of canned goods and batteries, seems to have been infected by it even before the disappearance of his daughter. His wife (Maria Bello) tips into a pool of despair. Other people, like the aunt of one of the suspects (Melissa Leo), are weighed down by bad luck and weary dread.But the most tormented character may be Detective Loki (Nearly all of “Prisoners” takes place within a single week, but Mr. Villeneuve wisely — if also somewhat cruelly — refuses to speed up, or to spike the action with jolts of adrenaline. He captures, with impressive discipline, just how slowly time can move during a crisis, how the static condition of not knowing can press down on every moment. Panic can be paralyzing, as it is for Keller’s wife and Joy’s parents, but acting rashly, as Keller is inclined to, can have catastrophic effects.“Prisoners” is the kind of movie that can quiet a room full of casual thrill-seekers. It absorbs and controls your attention with such assurance that you hold your breath for fear of distracting the people on screen, exhaling in relief or amazement at each new revelation. By the end, you may be a little worn out, and perhaps also slightly let down by the fussily clever revelations that wrap up the story, but in the meantime, you are a willing captive, unable to tell the difference between dread and delight.“Prisoners” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Graphic violence and profanity.





A version of this review appears in print on September 20, 2013, on Page C12 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;