The Proposal
6.7
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISBlame the heels. In her new movie, Like most Hollywood romantic comedies these days, “The Proposal” is all about bringing a woman to her knees, quite literally in this case. The simple premise is partly telegraphed in the advertising tag line, “Here comes the bribe,” which evokes wedding bells and desperation. One day at the office, Margaret Tate (Ms. Bullock), a Canadian who’s let her visa expire, suddenly finds herself scrambling for a way to stay in the United States and the big New York office where she rules with an iron fist clutching a designer bag. She finds the means to her salvation, yes, in more ways than one, in the pleasant form of her assistant, Andrew (A stud-in-waiting, Andrew will soon be attending to Margaret’s other desires, of course. Overlong story short: Margaret blackmails Andrew into a sham marriage proposal in exchange for a promotion. He agrees, though only after making her kneel on the sidewalk. They fly to a cute little town in Alaska, where she discovers his family lives on its own island in a mansion picturesquely surrounded by mountains. You can’t see Russia from the front door, but there are loads of amenities, if remarkably no visible hired help. Mom (Mary Steenburgen) and Dad (Craig T. Nelson) are on hand, as is Grandma Annie (You know the rest because you’ve seen (and read) it many times before. After nestling in the bountiful bosom of family and some unexpected naked slapstick with Andrew, Margaret melts. He mans the ramparts, she lowers her defenses. He thrusts, she parries. He chops wood and loses his shirt. She loses her cellphone and ditches the heels. He rescues her, scooping her out of the water after she falls from a boat. She shivers and smiles and tears up as she talks about her tragic past, revealing the sad little girl who’s long been hidden behind the cruel disguise of a sensationally successful professional adult. Ding-dong the witch is soon dead and in her place, well, here comes the bride.AdvertisementThe director marshaling all these clichés and stereotypes is AdvertisementMs. Bullock, who excels at playing spunky, is as appealing as usual, but the role proves as awkward as those heels. (Mr. Reynolds is equally likable,  though more decorative than anything else.) She’s always been better in fundamentally independent roles that allow her to grab the wheel (“The Proposal” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). The film has the line, “Show her who’s boss.” Enough said.THE PROPOSALOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page C8 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;