Tangled
7.8
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTTo watch The architecture — in particular that castle, its tower garlanded with clouds — is more or less as you remember it, and among the inhabitants is the usual crew of princesses, emotive beasts (a horse and a chameleon), villains and buffoons. The ambient noises (This is, all in all, a pleasant place to visit. Which is saying a lot, given how awful it could be in recent years. (Remember “Tangled” begins, like far too many animated features these days, with some annoyingly smart-alecky voice-over narration, courtesy of a charming rascal named Flynn Rider (AdvertisementLuckily, Flynn shuts up before too long, allowing the story to find its proper center of gravity, which belongs to Rapunzel (AdvertisementOn its long road to a theater near you, “Tangled” had a few different titles. As far as I know, none of them were “Rapunzel: Based on the Novel ‘Push’ by Sapphire,” but the film’s portrait of maternal monstrosity may remind you of The Disney pantheon is full of evil stepmothers, though none quite match Mother Gothel for sheer sadistic intensity. A classic underminer, she has brainwashed Rapunzel into loving her, and her brutal selfishness is camouflaged in sweet-voiced expressions of solicitude. Really, though, she keeps the girl around only because of that golden hair, which has the power to heal wounds, cure sickness and, most important for Mother Gothel’s purposes, reverse the aging process.But Rapunzel is young, curious and lively, and as she approaches her 18th birthday, she sets off on the usual heroic voyage of self-discovery, accompanied by Flynn and pursued by her mother, Flynn’s former partners in crime (he is a thief as well as a charmer) and a tireless police horse whose puffing, prancing and mugging represent the perfect marriage of Pixarian technical bravura and Disneyesque expressive cartooning.The action sequences are brisk and breathless, and the cute and grotesque secondary characters provide bits of comic diversion, but frankly you could get chases and gags of this kind from the animation division of just about any major studio these days. The heart of Disney animation lies in song and spectacle, and while none of the musical compositions here are quite at the level of For the eye, there are sequences that have some of the ravishing beauty and exquisite detail of the great, old hand-drawn Disney features, including a few that make gorgeous use of 3-D technology. A scene of paper lanterns descending through mist onto water is especially breathtaking, partly because it departs from the usual 3-D insistence on deep focus and sharply defined images, creating an experience that is almost tactile in its dreamy softness. Like much of “Tangled,” this moment gives a new look to some very familiar magic.“Tangled” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). Mild and sweet, but sometimes also rough and scary.TANGLEDOpens on Wednesday  nationwide. Directed by Nathan Greno and Byron Howard; written by Dan Fogelman; music by Alan Menken, lyrics by Glenn Slater; produced by Roy Conli; released by Walt Disney Pictures. Running time: 1 hour 32 minutes.WITH THE VOICES OF: 





A version of this review appears in print on November 24, 2010, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;