The Reader
7.6
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGIS“The Reader”Directed by The first flashback occurs shortly after the doleful opener, with Michael staring out a window at a passing train, an image that transports him to 1958, where his 15-year-old self (David Kross) sits hunched inside a streetcar in obvious pain. The young Michael rushes into the rainy streets and retches inside a building vestibule. A woman (Ms. Winslet) materializes, as if from nowhere, briskly cleans the mess and tells him to follow her. He does and, not long after, inside a flat lined with hanging nylons and clutter, she orders the boy out of his clothes and into the tub, before opening a towel and her legs to him. A discreet affair ensues, characterized by shots of decorously writhing flesh, tears, smiles, shouts and literature: Michael reads aloud to Hanna.In time the lovers separate,  and the story skips to the 1960s,  with Michael wearing sideburns and attending law school. One day a professor (Bruno Ganz) takes him and a few other students to a court where some women are being tried for Nazi war crimes, which is how Hanna re-enters Michael’s life. During the proceedings he comes to realize her secret, her shame, which has nothing to do with her being a Nazi prison guard: she’s illiterate. She goes to prison, years pass, and Mr. Fiennes takes over for Mr. Kross. Eventually a Holocaust survivor (Lena Olin) living in a swank Manhattan apartment delivers a stern lecture to Michael about exploiting the Holocaust, an admonition that arrives too late for this fatuous film.AdvertisementParadoxically, Mr. Hare’s apparent attempt to deepen or underline the novel’s ideas about the past informing the present, by kinking up its linear chronology with flashbacks, proves crippling: scrambling the time frame, so that the story repeatedly points to the past, only exposes the deep vein of self-pity that runs through the novel, flattening Mr. Schlink’s already unpersuasive bid at generational soul-seeking. The problems are evident in the film’s first flashback to Michael on that streetcar. The location would be meaningless (the scene isn’t in the novel), but this is Germany 13 years after the end of World War II, and an unhappy boy in a rail car isn’t just an unhappy boy: he is an allusion to the millions transported to the death camps.Mr. Schlink writes that “the pain I went through because of my love for Hanna was, in a way, the fate of my generation, a German fate.” In the novel and the film — which monumentalizes every trembling lip and fluttering eyelash, turning human gestures into Kodak moments — Michael’s pain turns him not just into Hanna’s victim, but also a kind of survivor. Outrageously, Hanna is a victim too, because she took the guard job only to hide her illiteracy, as if illiteracy were an excuse for barbarism. Not that the film dwells on barbarism: beauty is its currency, from the cinematography (by Chris Menges and Roger Deakins) that makes Ms. Winslet’s pale skin creamy, to the immaculate production design (Brigitte Broch). Even Michael’s visit to an extermination camp is beautifully lighted.There’s no surprise, of course, in a Hollywood movie designed for adult audiences (and for the awards season) featuring attractive lighting, seductive stars and glossy production values. And certainly there are things to recommend here, notably the affecting Mr. Kross and the rumpled, professionally weary Mr. Ganz. Ms. Winslet looks lovely, even when wearing a smear of wrinkles and a little gray during the later scenes, but she’s playing an impossible character. Her stern mien, clipped enunciation (most of the cast speaks in German-accented English) and abrupt, metronymic gestures are an uneasy fit for this naturally appealing and open actress and occasionally tilt into near-comedy, as in the scene in which Hanna furiously scrubs Michael in her bathtub with a brush and momentarily turns into a very naughty nurse.AdvertisementAlthough the commercial imperatives that drive a movie like this one are understandable — the novel was a best seller and an Oprah’s Book Club selection, for starters — you have to wonder who, exactly, wants or perhaps needs to see another movie about the Holocaust that embalms its horrors with artfully spilled tears and asks us to pity a death-camp guard. You could argue that the film isn’t really about the Holocaust, but about the generation that grew up in its shadow, which is what the book insists. But the film is neither about the Holocaust nor about those Germans who grappled with its legacy: it’s about making the audience feel good about a historical catastrophe that grows fainter with each new tasteful interpolation.“The Reader” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Discreet nudity and coitus.THE READEROpens on Wednesday in New York, Los Angeles and San Francisco. Directed by WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;