Midnight in Paris
7.7
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTThe definitive poem in English on the subject of cultural nostalgia may be a short verse by Robert Browning called “Memorabilia.” It begins with a gasp of astonishment — “Ah, did you once see Shelley plain?” — and ends with a shrug: “Well I forget the rest.” Isn’t that always how it goes? The past seems so much more vivid, more substantial, than the present, and then it evaporates with the cold touch of reality. The good old days are so alluring because we were not around, however much we wish we were.“Midnight in Paris,” Nothing here is exactly new, but why would you expect otherwise in a film so pointedly suspicious of novelty? Very little is stale, either, and Mr. Allen has gracefully evaded the trap built by his grouchy admirers and unkind critics — I’m not alone in fitting both descriptions — who complain when he repeats himself and also when he experiments. Not for the first time, but for the first time in a while, he has found a credible blend of whimsy and wisdom.Paris, golden and gray, breezy and melancholy, immune to its own abundant clichés and gorgeously shot by Darius Khondji, certainly helps. So does a roster of droppable names that includes recent Oscar winners, the current first lady of France and a pantheon of credibly impersonated artistic immortals. Was that Carla Bruni? Why yes, it was. And that was Salvador Dalí too. (Dalí is played by Adrien Brody. The multitalented Mme. Sarkozy plays a tour guide at the Musée Rodin.)AdvertisementOwen WilsonAdvertisementBut Gil, by means that Mr. Allen wisely leaves unexplained, is transported back into his chosen Parisian golden age, more or less reversing the process that brought Emma Bovary to Manhattan in his short story “The Kugelmass Episode” or Tom Baxter down from the movie screen in “Owen Wilson and Rachel McAdams in a scene from Woody Allen's "Midnight in Paris."The process repeats itself each night, granting Gil V.I.P. access to a nonstop Lost Generation party. It would be the height of bad manners to list every cultural hero he runs into — it’s a remarkably comprehensive catalog of the varieties of modernism percolating in Paris between the wars — but he makes the requisite pilgrimage to visit Gertrude Stein (Kathy Bates), who graciously agrees to read his manuscript. He also develops a crush on Adriana (Marion Cotillard), who has been keeping company with Hemingway (Corey Stoll) and Picasso (Marcial Di Fonzo Bo) and who wishes she could exchange the drab Paris of the ’20s for the Belle Époque, when things were really happening.Adriana’s sighing dissatisfaction with her own era mirrors Gil’s. Back in the daylight world of 21st-century Paris, he must contend with a materialistic fiancée (a superbly speeded-up Let’s not go there, you and I. Unless I’m mistaken, “Mr. Allen has often said that he does not want or expect his own work to survive, but as modest and lighthearted as “Midnight in Paris” is, it suggests otherwise: Not an ambition toward immortality so much as a willingness to leave something behind — a bit of memorabilia, or art, if you like that word better — that catches the attention and solicits the admiration of lonely wanderers in some future time. Ah, did you once see Woody plain? How strange it seems, and new.“Midnight in Paris” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Anything goes, but discreetly.MIDNIGHT IN PARISOpens on Friday in New York and Los Angeles. Written and directed by WITH: Kathy Bates (Gert), Adrien Brody (Salvador), Carla Bruni (Museum Guide), Marion Cotillard (Adriana), 





A version of this review appears in print on May 20, 2011, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;