Source Code
7.5
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISIt doesn’t take long for “In this case, the returnee in question isn’t reliving his own tragic past but someone else’s. When, after a few minutes, the nearing camera enters the train, it settles its sights on a man (A few flashy, mind-trippy moments later, Stevens is wearing a military uniform and strapped to a seat in a dark capsule as a woman’s voice murmurs something about “beleaguered castle” (the name of a solitaire game and a nod at the movie’s narrative design). The voice belongs to the crisp, impersonal Colleen Goodwin (What is it about our times (or cinema) that provokes existential crises in some of the more interesting action heroes? Like the running men in the Bourne movies and in “Duncan Jones, the director of the action thriller "Source Code," narrates a look at the film's train sequences.“Source Code” depends on something other than fate, which makes it a thematic (if lesser) cousin to “AdvertisementMr. Jones did lose me at the messy finish, if only on the level of logic (rarely a deal-breaker for me in science fiction), but he makes it easy to follow Stevens as he toggles between realities. Better still, he makes you want to do so. In crucial ways, “Source Code,” written by Ben Ripley, recalls “AdvertisementThis intimacy makes the movie feel more personal than industrial, and that’s also part of its appeal. Other than during the jolts of action when Mr. Jones cranks the volume, the performers speak rather than shout their lines, the default setting in too many thrillers. Just as you lean in to someone talking quietly, you lean in to Stevens and Christina as their chatter gives way to flirtation. The actors are nicely matched, and what a relief to like a new movie with Mr. Gyllenhaal after a run of groaners. In a sympathetic turn, he hits the dark and light notes right, bringing subtle differences to his performance, whether Stevens is questioning reality or riding that train of life and death and angling for what everyone wants: the chance to get it right.“Source Code” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Bomb violence and gunplay.SOURCE CODEOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by Duncan Jones; written by Ben Ripley; director of photography, Don Burgess; edited by Paul Hirsch; music by Chris Bacon; production design by Barry Chusid; costumes by Renee April; produced by Mark Gordon, Jordan Wynn and Philippe Rousselet; released by Summit Entertainment and Vendôme Pictures. Running time: 1 hour 33 minutes.WITH: 





Today’s Film Reviews: CAT RUN, directed by John
Stockwell. 11
CIRCO, a Spanish-language film
directed by Aaron Schock. 10
FAT, SICK &amp; NEARLY DEAD, a documentary
directed by Joe
Cross and Kurt Engfehr. 8
HOP, directed by Tim Hill. 8
IN A BETTER WORLD, a Danish-,
Swedish- and English-language
film directed by Susanne
Bier. 10
INSIDIOUS, directed by James
Wan. 12
QUEEN TO PLAY, a French-language
film directed by Caroline
Bottaro. 8
RUBBER, directed by Quentin
Dupieux. 14
SOURCE CODE, directed by Duncan
Jones. 6
SUPER, directed by James
Gunn. 13
TRUST, directed by David
Schwimmer. 8
TWO GATES OF SLEEP, directed
by Alistair Banks Griffin. 8
WRECKED, directed by Michael
Greenspan. 12
WRETCHES &amp; JABBERERS, a documentary
directed by Gerardine
Wurzburg. 8A version of this review appears in print on April 1, 2011, on Page C6 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;