Blood Brother
8.3
AdvertisementBy DAVID DeWITTRocky Braat, a few years into his career as a graphic designer, quit to seek authenticity (his word) by traveling to India, as so many young Americans have done before him. But his jaunt is different. After a chance stop to visit a home for children with H.I.V., he decided to stay. What compels him to remain there, working at the home, today?Some answers are recorded in Many kids, significantly, are individualized beyond simple background figures; they all have a joy that bursts through the screen, their smiles diminishing their arid south Indian environment and their medical condition. When they’re in danger — as in one harrowing late night motorcycle ride to a hospital, stymied by a passing train — the editing captures tension worthy of a Paul Greengrass thriller.“No child ever grows out of their need for family,” Mr. Braat says. That includes him, and he’s the mystery of the film. Though not particularly introspective and never a whiner, Mr. Braat — who has a troubled relationship with his father and says his mother’s boyfriends beat him as a child — also sees the downside of his new familial sense: “There’s freedom in not being close to anyone,” he says, as death again visits his home, and the villagers begin to distrust his presence.He worries he’ll become the cliché he’s always feared: that of the white king helping the darker-skinned needy. Viewers may fear this as well. But by the end of Why? Perhaps it’s because Mr. Braat has discovered the power of love. The film lets us witness it, particularly as he cares for a young boy, Surya, in a hospital: gently wiping fluid from his sores, scars on his eyes and phlegm from his lips. Surya’s prognosis is not good. Still, Mr. Braat is there.Advertisement“Love is making someone who is sad feel happy,” one girl says, answering an interviewer’s question. “Blood Brother” showed me that love. I doubt I’ll be the only one.





A listing of credits and schedule information on Friday with a film review of &#8220;Blood Brother,&#8221; using information from a publicist, misidentified the theater where the film is playing. While it was originally scheduled to be shown at the Village East Cinema in Manhattan, it is at the Landmark&#8217;s Sunshine Cinema in the East Village, not at the Village East.A version of this review appears in print on October 18, 2013, on Page C13 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;