The Tourist
6.0
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISIt takes a big man to hold the screen level when You know that movie. It’s the one in which Cary Grant and Grace Kelly don’t just travel by train, they also trade knowing looks in the first-class dining car as the waiter fills their glasses, and a shady type secretly takes their photo. The people behind “The Tourist” would like you to flash back to 1955 — as Ms. Jolie’s wardrobe of long gloves suggests  — a risky strategy, given that you actually might. The truth is that it takes an exceptional director to prevent an entertainment as flimsy as this from collapsing under its own weightlessness. Alfred Hitchcock pulled it off with Grant and Kelly in Stargazing is the only reason bonbons like “The Tourist” are made, dreams of box office bonanzas aside. But stars need just the right setting and a director who knows how to make them shine, as Steven Soderbergh does with Mr. Pitt and George Clooney in the “Ocean’s” franchise. The director also needs to hold his own, which, from the generic look and feel of “The Tourist,” clearly wasn’t the case with It’s a nice idyll among a wash of clichés that include Russian muscle in service to a big meanie, Shaw (Steven Berkoff), whose quest for stolen loot leads him to Elise Ward (Ms. Jolie). A mystery woman of rare ability (she can pick a lock and wear off-the-shoulder gowns), she eludes Shaw while dodging assorted law enforcement agencies, including Scotland Yard, where Paul Bettany and Timothy Dalton curl stiff upper lips. Elise pauses long enough to slide into a train seat opposite Frank Tupelo (Mr. Depp), who, after gulping at his good fortune, explains that he’s a vacationing Wisconsin math teacher (as if!). Dinner leads to drinks leads to complications, including hailstorming bullets and a few sluggish boat chases in the Venice canals.AdvertisementHollywood has a long history of collecting (and devouring) European directors, but Mr. von Donnersmarck was an odd choice for froth like this. A few years ago he attracted some attention for AdvertisementIt must be tough for Ms. Jolie to find roles that fit. Off screen she remains a fascinating presence, but on screen she now tends to overwhelm her roles and even her movies. Like every memorable screen star, she still has a face you can get lost in, with its push-pull of hard, jutting angles and well-endowed lips. It’s a face built for extremes, though early on she could also make it work for somewhat smaller, human-scaled roles that were nonetheless tricky for her. Superheroes and superfreaks have long been her truer calling, one reason that “The Tourist” seemed vaguely promising. When she first appears in a come-hither outfit and a small private smile, she looks ready for liftoff. She never ignites, and neither does the movie.Mr. Depp doesn’t fare better with a role that forces him to play meek and disappointingly  mild, despite a few screenwriter-supplied tics. (Mr. von Donnersmarck shares writing credit with Christopher McQuarrie and Julian Fellowes.) A brilliant character actor and accidental movie star, Mr. Depp has rarely been persuasive playing average. He likes tunneling into his characters, preferably under a thick smear of makeup and flamboyant threads, which is why he’s never made sense in mainstream romance. There’s no place for him to hide with Frank, so he stands around trying to look hapless as Ms. Jolie grabs the lead. There’s definitely some amusement in watching her come to his rescue, a role reversal the movie only flirts with. But oh how much more fun it would have been if Mr. Depp had really played the girl, eyeliner  and all.“The Tourist” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Bloodless violence. THE TOURISTOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by WITH: 





Today’s Film Reviews: AND EVERYTHING IS GOING
FINE, a documentary directed
by Steven Soderbergh. 17
BEIJING TAXI, a Mandarinlanguage
documentary directed
by Miao Wang. 10
THE CHRONICLES OF NARNIA:
THE VOYAGE OF THE DAWN
TREADER, directed by Michael
Apted. 16
THE COMPANY MEN, directed
by John Wells. 10
THE FIGHTER, directed by
David O. Russell. 1
HEMINGWAY’S GARDEN OF
EDEN, directed by John
Irvin. 14
THE TEMPEST, directed by
Julie Taymor. 10
THE TOURIST, directed by
Florian Henckel von Donnersmarck.
8
VENGEANCE, an English-,
Cantonese- and French-language
film directed by
Johnnie To. 17
YOU WONT MISS ME, directed
by Ry Russo-Young. 15A version of this review appears in print on December 10, 2010, on Page C8 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;