Transformers: Revenge of the Fallen
6.0
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe creative people behind the cretinous 1. Young teenage boys who still play with Transformer toys (or keep them under the bed).2. Older teenage boys who identify with the professional  doofus 3. Somewhat older teenage boys who would like to play with the professional hottie Megan Fox.4. Boys of all ages who think it would be cool to go to war and run around the desert shooting guns.Of course, viewers can embrace several categories at once; say, those who collect toys and liked Mr. LaBeouf in the last And make no mistake: Mr. Bay is an auteur. His signature adorns every image in his movies, as conspicuously as that of Lars von Trier, and every single one is inscribed with a specific worldview and moral sensibility. Mr. Bay’s subject — overwhelming violent conquest — is as blatant and consistent as his cluttered mise-en-scène. His images, particularly during the frequent action sequences, can be difficult to visually track, but they are also consistently disjointed. (And proudly self-referential: the only director he overtly cites is himself, with a shot of the poster for his movie “Bad Boys II.”) The French filmmaker Jacques Rivette once described an auteur as someone who speaks in the first person. Mr. Bay prefers to shout.AdvertisementThe shouting here commences just as Sam Witwicky (Mr. LaBeouf) heads off to college having ridden shotgun on a battle royal between extraterrestrials in the first flick. While fighting over the fate of the planet, the heroic Autobots and the villainous Decepticons hang out on Earth disguised as machines with cute nicknames, mostly fast cars, big rigs and military planes. The Autobot leader, Optimus Prime (voiced by Peter Cullen), usually rolls as a Peterbilt truck tricked out with shiny chrome and red painted flames, while the car parked in Sam’s family garage, a screaming if now voiceless yellow 2010 Camaro, goes by Bumblebee. Every so often, the aliens convert to their true shapes, their articulated parts opening up like metallic origami.AdvertisementGiven Mr. Bay’s predilection for action over introspection, it’s no surprise that he plucks Sam out of school right after he cracks his first textbook. Along with his unlikely girlfriend, Mikaela (Ms. Fox), Sam heads off to an adventure that reunites him with many of the first movie’s characters, including an embarrassing John Turturro as Simmons, who provides some wincingly unfunny comic relief, and some military beefcake in the hardbody forms of There’s a serious disconnect in the movie between the image of power that those GM brands are meant to convey and the bankrupt car industry they now signify. That disconnect only deepens with the introduction of two new Autobot characters, the illiterate, bickering twins Skids (Tom Kenny) and Mudflap (Reno Wilson), both of which take the shape of Chevrolet concept cars. The characters have been given conspicuously cartoonish, so-called black voices that indicate that minstrelsy remains as much in fashion in Hollywood as when, well, Jar Jar Binks was set loose by George Lucas. For what it’s worth, the script, by Ehren Kruger, You’re not meant to take that seriously, of course, just like there’s nothing to the reference to President Obama being whisked out of danger instead of standing tall like Optimus Prime and the rest of the robotic heroes. But that’s the perverse genius of Michael Bay. Despite the tediousness of his stories and inanity of his visual ideas, he always manages to keep you laughing and shaking your head in disbelief at the outlandishness of his cinematic spectacles, with their orange explosions, armament fetishism and even their noxious stereotypes. The man just wears you out and wears you down, so much so that it’s easy to pretend that you’re not ingesting 2 hours and 30 minutes of warmongering along with all that dumb fun.“Transformers: Revenge of the Fallen” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Bloodless violence.TRANSFORMERSRevenge of the FallenOpens on Wednesday nationwide.Directed by WITH: WITH THE VOICES OF: Peter Cullen (Optimus Prime), Hugo Weaving (Megatron), Tom Kenny (Wheelie; Skids), Reno Wilson (Mudflap) and Tony Todd (the Fallen).





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;