In Time
6.7
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe tick tick tock of the mortal clock gives the science-fiction thriller “In Time” its slick, sweet premise. Set in a near or far future in a segregated city that resembles the separated, weirdly depopulated neighborhoods in and around Los Angeles (where it was shot), the movie imagines a world in which everyone stops aging at 25. (Just like in Hollywood!) On that birthday a glowing green digital clock on everyone’s left forearm starts running, giving them just 365 days to go and then 364, 363, 362. When the days run out, the clock stops for good.In this futureworld in which time is literally money — everything, including food, shelter and wages, is valued in minutes, hours, years, decades — it’s possible to slow the escaping hourglass sand by buying more time, as the rich do. The poor, of course, are slaves to time: many die young and stay pretty, and are preyed on by time bandits called Minute Men, who clean clocks at gunpoint.In the ghetto, an industrial-looking time zone called Dayton where Will (It’s a resonant, er, timely premise, something that Advertisement“In Time” is closer to “Gattaca” and plays like something of a self-conscious, often clever amendment to that earlier film. In “Gattaca” the multiracial, multiethnic elect who have been genetically engineered to idealized type effectively function as a master race. “In Time” resurrects the master-slave dialectic and also invokes the Holocaust, specifically in the shots of the dead and poor who lie where they fall. For the most part, Mr. Niccol doesn’t continue down this perilous avenue, though like other filmmakers he can’t resist tricking out his resident storm troopers, a policelike unit known as the Timekeepers, in regulation black and shiny, shiny leather. Despite these nods at that old fascinating fascism, Mr. Niccol appears to be going for something a touch lighter.AdvertisementThe trouble is that romping and lightness don’t come naturally to him. The story opens with Will wishing his mother, Rachel (the young, dewy Olivia Wilde, in an amusing bit of casting), a happy 50th. The two live in an artfully dilapidated apartment with gated windows in Dayton, one of a number of different zones that constitute the new political and geographic order. Will has little sense of the world beyond the ghetto, though he has heard of an almost mythological zone named New Greenwich. He gets a chance to go over that rainbow when a stranger, Henry Hamilton (Matt Bomer, from the cable show “White Collar”), transfers a century over to Will, a bequest that brings new life and some familiar genre danger.Hamilton’s gift isn’t purely altruistic: he’s wrung out at 105, tired, and it allows him to tap out his own reserves, leading to his death. The Timekeepers try to blame Will, who meanwhile splits for the rarefied clime of New Greenwich, where everyone moves as slow as molasses because, yes, they have all the time in the world, as Mr. Niccol makes sure to state — and restate — in his screenplay. There Will meets Sylvia (There’s plenty to enjoy about that genre standard, which, with the help of the cinematographer Roger Deakins (“In Time” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Gun violence and death.IN TIMEOpens on Friday nationwide. Written and directed by WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on October 28, 2011, on Page C8 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;