The Imaginarium of Doctor Parnassus
6.8
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe most recent circus to pop out of Mr. Ledger was in the middle of production on “The Imaginarium” when he died, at 28, in January  2008, from an accidental overdose of prescription medicines. Mr. Gilliam, in either a desperate or inventive move, decided to complete the movie with three different marquee names — Never one to take a straight line where a crooked one will do, Mr. Gilliam plunges you into the world of “The Imaginarium” so brusquely that it takes a little time  to get your bearings. The story opens in a dark corner of contemporary London in which a jerry-built theater, stage lights brilliantly glowing, has materialized amid the gritty urban landscape. The theater is the imaginarium of the film’s title, a traveling show with a remarkable feature attraction, Dr. Parnassus (He is, in a manner of speaking, though his roots prove to be more mystical than strictly performative: once upon a time he was sharing deep thoughts on a mountain  when the devil, nicknamed Mr. Nick (That Mr. Ledger enters the film with a hangman’s noose around his neck is disconcerting, if only because it serves as a blunt reminder of his death and even some of the early, irrelevant chatter about a possible suicide. Mr. Gilliam could have omitted this interlude with some skillful cutting or at the very least trimmed it down, to lessen its grimness and any taint of exploitation. He might have thought he was honoring the actor’s legacy by letting the scene play out, complete with a vivid silhouetted image of the nearly expired character hanging by a rope, but what he’s mainly done is punch a hole in his own fiction. Mr. Ledger’s performance — Tony is soon kicking and scheming — helps fill the hole, though not entirely.AdvertisementAn amnesiac, Tony immediately joins ranks with the travelers, eventually taking over ringmaster duties and bringing new energy, customers and production values to the shabby show. By the time he’s hit his stride, this natural smoothie is sweet-talking women into parting with their purses so they can take a ride into their own feverish imaginings. Much like musical numbers, the fantasy sequences elbow into the narrative, with bursts of candied color and the kind of whimsical touches that will be familiar to fans of Mr. Gilliam’s work, his animations in particular. In one sequence a dowager floats gaga in a wonderland filled with high heels the size of houses, a different Tony (Mr. Depp) at her side.AdvertisementHe’s not the only one transformed: when she gazes into a mirror, a younger, thinner version of herself stares back, which helps explain why visitors to the imaginarium are so blissed out when they exit. Whether you will be similarly enthralled on leaving “The Imaginarium of Doctor Parnassus” largely depends on whether its will-o’-the-wisp story, from a script by Mr. Gilliam and Charles McKeown, means less to you than the movie’s  hallucinations, its self-conscious play between the theatrical and the cinematic registers, and its charming performances. It might also depend on whether you can see past the loss  of Mr. Ledger, as Mr. Gilliam has tried, and instead hold onto this last, bittersweet performance. Despite the fatigue around his eyes, he looks like he really enjoyed his trip into Doctor Gilliam’s imaginarium.“The Imaginarium of Doctor Parnassus” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Salty language and shifty proceedings. THE IMAGINARIUM of Doctor ParnassusOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on December 25, 2009, on Page C6 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;