Guardians of the Galaxy
8.1
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe Times critic Manohla Dargis reviews “Guardians of the Galaxy.”Talking about directing in blockbusters is sometimes nothing more than wishful thinking. Most are such impersonally operated machines — dedicated to the business of brand storytelling — that they tend to obliterate any whisper of individuality. That there’s a palpable directorial sensibility in Lifted by a cast of professional charmers and a “What, me worry?” vibe, “Guardians of the Galaxy” is one of those interstellar westerns about a motley group of appealing baddies who rise to the heroic occasion and ride to the rescue, on spaceships rather than Appaloosas. The John Wayne role here — or, really, the 1970s Harrison Ford one — belongs to Quill is a good and a sometimes bad guy who fights and jokes amid swirling, polychromatic smoke and cascading words like Xandarians, Morag and the Celestial (and awesome) Head. He comes into possession of a pretty blue rock that everyone would risk death trying to get, hence a throwaway about A scene from the film featuring Chris Pratt.In other words, you don’t need to be held hostage by the Marvel Weltanschauung to enjoy “Guardians.” The story may be confusing and generic by turns, but if you shake off the bonds of narrative coherency it’s liberating letting the weird words — Yondu, Necrocraft, Sakkaran — just slide right past you, much like the zigzagging, exploding 3-D spaceships. What sticks are the fantastical landscapes, the beautiful creature designs and the actors delivering lively performances, even with strata of makeup and digital wizardry. Among the many amusements is the floating head (kind of like in AdvertisementFilled with a multihued populace, Xandar is shiny, clean and bright, and looks familiar because it evokes both our world (one building suggests the AdvertisementThat’s a relief, because the movie doesn’t start promisingly, opening with not one but two female clichés: the dead mother and the disposable chick. Both belong to Quill — he tells the chick, who enters with bed hair and not much else, that he forgot she was even there — and they suggest that however futuristic the movie may be, its sexual politics and worldview are antediluvian. (You have to wonder if the people who make these entertainments ever think about what such tired stereotypes say to young viewers, not to mention their own sons and daughters.) The sense that the movie’s appealingly old-fashioned jocularity, reminiscent of late Howard Hawks, has its fatal drawbacks dissipates with the introduction of Gamora (Zoe Saldana), a green, mean, not-so-jolly killing machine.However familiar, Gamora turns out to be better than most Strong Female Characters — you know those girls: They’re fierce and finally inconsequential — that the blogger Tasha Robinson went after in a It’s old news that the major studios, having long absorbed the lessons of B-movie titans like Roger Corman, are now primarily in the business of churning out big-ticket exploitation flicks. (As a studio executive said way back in 1975, “What was ‘Jaws’ but an old Corman monster-from-the-deep flick?”) It’s perfect, then, that Mr. Gunn, having started out working for Troma Entertainment, that gleeful purveyor of barrel-scraping trash, has been tapped by Marvel for its latest bid at box-office domination. He’s a funny guy who brings a light touch to cartoon violence, whether he’s going for giggles (as in “Given these moments of feeling, it doesn’t seem accidental that two of the brightest characters in the movie, which Mr. Gunn wrote with Nicole Perlman, are the raccoon and the tree, both surprisingly melancholic figures whose presence proves more resonant than their patter. The raccoon, Rocket (given an effectively grating screech by “Guardians of the Galaxy” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Bloodless violence and soft expletives.





A version of this review appears in print on August 1, 2014, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;