The Day the Earth Stood Still
5.5
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTLong after we are gone, science fiction movies about our impending extinction will instruct whoever comes next that we were a strange, neurotic species indeed. We could not — cannot — get enough of fantasies of destruction, meant at once to inflame and soothe our fear of vanishing altogether, whether through war, ecological catastrophe, disease or alien invasion.We know we have it coming, and a movie like The old “Day,” made early in the atomic age, has long inspired this kind of laughter. It has also, in part because of its expressive, shadowy black-and-white cinematography, retained a measure of haunting, unsettling weirdness.Any hope that the new “Day,” directed by Scott Derrickson from a script by David Scarpa, might also someday rise above its pulpy, corny, somber silliness rests mainly on the shoulders of Only one will listen:  Dr. Helen Benson, played with a bit too much ennui by AdvertisementThe secretary of defense (But wait, Helen pleads. We can change! To provide evidence of this transformative potential she takes Klaatu to see her mentor,  Professor Barnhardt (John Cleese), a scientist who listens to Bach and was awarded a Still, any movie that awards a former Monty Python cast member a Nobel Prize in anything cannot be all bad. And “The Day the Earth Stood Still” could be worse. Its scenario and many of its scenes feel ripped off rather than freshly imagined — why do aliens always seem to end up in New Jersey? — and the relationship between Helen and her stepson, Jacob (Jaden Smith), does not quite add the necessary element of heart-tugging sentiment.After “Wall-E” and “The Day the Earth Stood Still” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). We’re doomed! THE DAY THE EARTH STOOD STILLOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by Scott Derrickson; written by David Scarpa, based on the screenplay by Edmund H. North; director of photography, David Tattersall; edited by Wayne Wahrman; music by Tyler Bates; production designer, David Brisbin; visual effects supervisor, Jeffrey A. Okun; produced by Erwin Stoff, Gregory Goodman and Paul Harris Boardman; released by 20th Century Fox. Running time: 1 hour 50 minutes.WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page C7 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;