Mad Max: Fury Road
8.1
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTGeorge Miller narrates a sequence from his film featuring Tom Hardy, Charlize Theron and Nicholas Hoult.Desolate, post-apocalyptic landscapes, zombie-ridden or not, are perennial popular tourist destinations for 21st-century moviegoers and couch potatoes. “Mad Max: Fury Road” is like a visit to a World Heritage site. Some of us — old enough to remember when nuclear Armageddon had not yet given way to climate change as the main source of existential anxiety — harbor a special fondness for the young “Fury Road,” directed, like the others, The Times critic A. O. Scott reviews “Mad Max: Fury Road.”One of these, a designated “blood bag” kept alive to transfuse one of Joe’s “war boys,” is Max himself, played without a wasted word or gesture but with plenty of expressive grunts and snorts Let’s back up for a moment. This “Mad Max” unfolds in fast, hectic, relentlessly linear motion. It starts quietly, with Max standing on a dusty outcropping, casually snacking on a two-headed gecko as he sketches the relevant background in voice-over. When things started going bad — when the world collapsed in a welter of greed, violence and stupidity — he failed to protect his wife and daughter. Their memory both haunts and grounds him, making him able, even in the worst circumstances, to recognize decency in himself and others.And then the fights and chases commenceAdvertisementThe first “Mad Max,” released in the United States in 1980 (with a soundtrack that dubbed the thick Australian accents), was a no-money Down Under cult-exploitation movie. “The Road Warrior” (1981) was a little fancier, but it still had the snarl and velocity of a punk-rock club show. “Beyond Thunderdome” (1985) was arena rock by comparison, but Mr. Miller — whose résumé also includes “The script, which Mr. Miller wrote with Brendan McCarthy and Nico Lathouris, has been whittled almost clean of expository dialogue and touchy-feely bushwa. A cut or a pan can explain or express much more than words. When “Fury Road” reaches for emotional grandeur it relies on the faces of its cast — Ms. Theron could be a silent-movie heroine, despite the noise that surrounds her — and on Junkie XL’s superb, full-throated score. When it wants to crack jokes, the movie reaches for quick, profane sight gags or elaborate feats of Newtonian improbability.AdvertisementNearly all of which unfold in real physical space. It’s worth paying a few more dollars for 3-D: That newfangled format brings out the virtuosity of Mr. Miller’s old-school approach. The themes of vengeance and solidarity, the wide-open spaces and the kinetic, ground-level movement mark “Fury Road” as a western, and the filmmakers pay tribute to such masters of the genre as John Ford, Like Mr. Jones’s universe, Mr. Miller’s world has its rules. Viewers raised on the more baroque, digitally enabled forms of blockbuster spectacle are likely to admire the relative simplicity of “Fury Road,” while aficionados of the traditional slam-bang methods will revel in its coherence. Even in the most chaotic fights and collisions, everything makes sense. This is not a matter of realism — come on, now — but of imaginative discipline. And Mr. Miller demonstrates that great action filmmaking is not only a matter of physics but of ethics as well. There is cause and effect; there are choices and consequences.There is also enormous pleasure in watching those consequences play out, and in encountering surprises along the way. Not twists — the plot moves from Point A to Point B and back again, ending up pretty much where you knew it would — but kinks and swerves, tricks of perspective and playful reversals of expectation. A sweet, almost wordless romance blossoms between a hapless war boy (Nicholas Hoult) and one of Joe’s brides, as she and her comrades evolve from eye candy into a feminist guerrilla force. They are joined by a band of older women called the Vuvalini, who along with Furiosa, decide to give Immortan Joe’s patriarchy a taste of its own medicine.It’s all great fun, and quite rousing as well — a large-scale genre movie that is at once unpretentious and unafraid to bring home a message. Way back in the “Thunderdome” days, Tina Turner sang, ““Mad Max: Fury Road” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). A ruthless critique of everything existing. 





A version of this review appears in print on May 15, 2015, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;