Crank: High Voltage
6.2
Bai Ling directs the attention of a severely overstressed Jason Statham in the action thriller “Crank: High Voltage.” 
                            It has taken only three years for Chev Chelios ( Trailer: 'Crank High Voltage'
                            Like its predecessor, &ldquo;Crank: High Voltage,&rdquo; the latest abomination from Mark Neveldine and Brian Taylor, is boorish, bigoted and borderline pornographic. As Chev charges around town searching for his stolen organ &mdash; juicing himself with jumper cables, a Taser and a bout of old-lady frottage &mdash; the plot vigorously abuses Mexicans, Asians, women and the disabled with equal-opportunity glee.        
                            Bearing the brunt of the punishment is Chev&rsquo;s pole-dancing girlfriend (Amy Smart) and a besotted Asian hooker (Bai Ling); apparently Chev&rsquo;s resemblance to a rutting bull is not limited to his neck and personality.        
                            Fans of the original (and you are out there) will be thrilled to discover that the director of photography, Brandon Trost, seems confused about the meaning of the term &ldquo;private parts&rdquo; and that the filmmakers are still resisting maturity. &ldquo;Isn&rsquo;t everybody looking for their heart?&rdquo; Mr. Neveldine asks in the press notes. On this evidence, it seems unlikely.        




                            Written and directed by Mark Neveldine and Brian Taylor; director of photography, Brandon Trost; edited by Fernando Villena; music by Mike Patton; production designer, Jerry Fleming; produced by Tom Rosenberg, Gary Lucchesi, Skip Williamson and Richard Wright; released by Lionsgate. Running time: 1 hour 25 minutes.        
                            WITH: Vladimir V. Putin&rsquo;s return to the Kremlin in 2012 diminishes the possibility that Russia will evolve into a stable democracy.Our legacy from the war in Iraq will be written in the lives of the people we have left behind.What did an imprisoned Times columnist have to do with a postwar best seller?