Pretty Woman
6.9
LEAD: Yes, yes, the 80's are over. But isn't there room in the time capsule for ''Pretty Woman,'' the romantic comedy about a lovelorn corporate raider and a sweet, wholesome streetwalker from Hollywood Boulevard? This one truly deserves a place. It is something special.
Yes, yes, the 80's are over. But isn't there room in the time capsule for ''Pretty Woman,'' the romantic comedy about a lovelorn corporate raider and a sweet, wholesome streetwalker from Hollywood Boulevard? This one truly deserves a place. It is something special.

''Pretty Woman'' is the story of Edward Lewis (Richard Gere), a charming, debonair bachelor who apparently has trouble getting along with women he cannot hire and fire. Edward is alone on business for a week in Los Angeles, and one night, on a whim, he borrows a fancy car from his lawyer (Jason Alexander) and winds up in the red-light district. He says he was really looking for Beverly Hills.

Edward spots a gorgeous hooker named Vivian and asks her for directions, nothing more. But soon the two have struck up a business arrangement whereby Vivian will provide a week's worth of companionship for a $3,000 fee. The film's title was changed to ''Pretty Woman'' from ''3,000,'' so it can't be said that everything about it is in bad taste. And the hooker is played by Julia Roberts, who is so enchantingly beautiful, so funny, so natural and such an absolute delight that it is hard to hold anything against the movie.

Edward and Vivian take up residence at the Regent Beverly Wilshire Hotel, which is plugged so incessantly throughout the film that you may find yourself trying to ring for room service. There, Edward has defied his fear of heights to stay in the penthouse because, as he explains it, ''It's the best.'' Their first evening together is somewhat awkward because the film, directed by Garry Marshall and written by J. F. Lawton, cannot decide whether to be leering or falsely naive. A compromise of sorts is reached when Vivian apparently performs her professional services upon Edward (Mr. Marshall discreetly cuts away after a faint suggestion) while he watches ''I Love Lucy.''

Once the ice is broken, it is time for the film's true raison d'etre to emerge. ''Pretty Woman'' isn't about sex, but about conspicuous consumption. Edward says things like ''I took the liberty of ordering everything on the menu,'' and he sets Vivian loose on Rodeo Drive with his credit cards in hand. Later in the story, after she has been snubbed by shopkeepers because of an overly hookerish outfit (the costume designer, Marilyn Vance-Straker, has to go way over the top to offend Rodeo Drive standards of propriety), Edward escorts her personally and enters one boutique, declaring, ''We're going to be spending an obscene amount of money in here.'' One evening, Edward takes Vivian via limousine and private jet to the opera in San Francisco, borrowing several thousand dollars' worth of necklace for her to wear. Everything in the movie has a price tag.

What happens, of course, is that Vivian emerges from her humble existence to become the lovely, gracious, opera-loving lady who can fill the void in Edward's lonely life. Astonishingly, no one connected with ''Pretty Woman'' seems to have acknowledged any significant difference between a Cockney flower-seller and a prostitute who is willing to get into a car driven by a perfect stranger and whose roommate (Laura San Giacomo) has spent the rent money on drugs. Every now and then, just to add to the film's confusion on this basic issue, Vivian picks a fight with Edward and accuses him of treating her like a prostitute. But Edward can hardly be blamed for having a memory that goes back longer than three days.

Despite this quintessentially late 80's outlook, and despite a covetousness and underlying misogyny that bring Mr. Marshall's earlier ''Overboard'' to mind, ''Pretty Woman'' manages to be giddy, lighthearted escapism much of the time. Ms. Roberts, as noted, is a complete knockout, and this performance will make her a major star. (The dying-swan role in ''Steel Magnolias'' that won her this year's Oscar nomination seems very pale by comparison.) Mr. Gere is mildly constrained by the button-down aspects of Edward's character, but he manages to be dapper, amusing, and the perfect foil. Though it has not been that long since he himself was on the other side of the Hollywood gigolo equation, he conveys a dignity and presence well suited to a soon-to-be-radicalized captain of industry.

Ms. San Giacomo adds a welcome note of reality to the film during her brief appearances, as well as a coarseness suggesting that not every Hollywood prostitute is cut out to play Galatea. Hector Elizondo is particularly winning as the supercilious hotel manager who, like everyone else in ''Pretty Woman'' except those Rodeo Drive shopkeepers, falls in love with Vivian on sight.

''I appreciate this seduction scene you got goin','' Ms. Roberts's Vivian tells Edward early in the story, ''but let me give you a tip: I'm a sure thing.'' And how. 
