Nothing Like the Holidays
6.2
AdvertisementBy STEPHEN HOLDENThe gnarly dead tree in front of the Rodriguez house in Humboldt Park, a working-class Latino neighborhood of Chicago, will not be processed into kindling. As the Rodriguez menfolk, gathered for Christmas, attack it with chain saws, their incompetence with power tools makes them look like fools. Even when they try to drag it out of the earth with ropes and chains attached to a car, it refuses to budge.That old dead tree is an unwieldy metaphor for family solidarity in In its early scenes the movie, which has as many underdeveloped subplots as characters, threatens to be another melodrama about a returning soldier.  The glum Jesse (But “Nothing Like the Holidays,” directed by No sooner has the Rodriguez clan gathered around the dinner table than the mother, Anna (Elizabeth Peña, who is at least a decade too young for her role), announces she is divorcing Eddy (AdvertisementDinner, of course, is ruined. The taciturn Eddy, who urges a reluctant Jesse, the younger of his two sons, to go into the family business, has his own secret torment. (Hint: It’s medical.)Anna, as written, is a disagreeable piece of work.  She badgers her non-Hispanic daughter-in-law, Sarah (Also on hand is a daughter, Roxanna (Vanessa Ferlito), a struggling television actress living in Hollywood who is waiting for a call from her agent about a part. Will Roxanna hook up with her hunky but shady childhood friend Ozzy (Jay Hernandez), who carries a gun along with a potentially lethal grudge against a neighbor? Ms. Ferlito and Mr. Hernandez lend the movie a smidgen of heat.The most engaging moments of “Nothing Like the Holidays” are the festive party sequences in which the characters throw off their troubles to dance in the bodega and pour into the street in their Christmas finery. Their troubles momentarily forgotten, the residents of Humboldt Park really know how to enjoy themselves. “Nothing Like the Holidays” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has a little violence and sexual situations. NOTHING LIKE THE HOLIDAYSOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page C14 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;