Prometheus
7.0
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTIf you grew up in the 1970s, you may have a dim memory of Ridley ScottIn his new film, A lot of the pleasure of “Prometheus” is in that hovering. Once the themes touch down and the arc of the story becomes clear, some disappointment sets in. But Mr. Scott’s sense of visual scale, which has often produced hectic, hectoring grandiosity (AdvertisementYou might also call them science-fiction clichés, but the amazing thing is that, at least for a while, they don’t feel that way. The visual scheme is sufficiently captivating, and most of the performances are subtle enough that whatever skepticism you may arrive with quickly turns into happy disorientation. The 3-D is unusually graceful — your gaze is absorbed rather than assaulted — and you are pulled into a world of lovely and disconcerting strangeness with plenty of time to puzzle over the behavior of its inhabitants.These include David, an android played with silken wit by The actual humans in his company are the usual motley bunch. The captain of the Prometheus is Idris Elba, who smokes cigarillos and owns an ancient squeezebox and a bewildering accent. His boss, representing obscure but undoubtedly sinister corporate interests, is AdvertisementLike John Ford and Shakespeare, Mr. Scott likes to throw a few clownish, expendable rustics into his ensembles, though in this case the designated buffoons are bickering scientists played by Rafe Spall and Sean Harris. Tradition dictates that there also be, among all this compromised, agenda-driven humanity, a paragon of decency and idealism under duress. This would be Elizabeth Shaw — Ms. Rapace, the girl with the dragon tattoo in the Swedish film adaptations of the Stieg Larsson trilogy, is a fine heroine, vulnerable and determined. Her physique and features suggest a Hello Kitty version of Ms. Weaver’s Ripley, though, as in the “Dragon Tattoo” movies, her pixieishness is accompanied by superhuman endurance. This is evident, above all, in a scene of self-inflicted surgery capable of reducing a packed, rowdy theater to stunned, appalled, almost reverent silence.But the virtuosity on display makes the weakness of the story — the screenplay is by Jon Spaihts and “Prometheus” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Some gory sights and salty talk.





A version of this review appears in print on June 8, 2012, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;