The Theory of Everything
7.7
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTThe Academy Award-winning director James Marsh discusses his newest project, “The Theory of Everything,” which chronicles the life of the cosmologist Stephen Hawking.“The Theory of Everything,”The material could hardly be richer. Mr. Hawking is both an important scientist and a fixture of popular culture, the author of best-selling books that seek to explain concepts comprehensible only to specialists. In his 20s, while still a graduate student at Cambridge, he learned he had amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (also known as Lou Gehrig’s disease and, in the movie’s preferred phrase, a motor neuron disorder). Given two years to live, he completed his doctorate and married Jane Wilde, a fellow graduate student (in European literature) with whom he had three children.Benedict Cumberbatch, left, and Eddie Redmayne both star in biopics about ingenious British men.Jane Hawking’s memoir, “Traveling to Infinity: My Life With Stephen,” is the film’s primary source (the screenplay is by Anthony McCarten), and “The Theory of Everything” is, above all, the portrait of a marriage. Jane, played with winning pluck and gravity by Later, he will reverse himself and propose a boundaryless, beginningless cosmos. In the meantime, his illness will test Jane’s resourcefulness, pulling her away from her own work and causing her much stress and worry. In her frustration, she turns to Jonathan (Charlie Cox), a kind and handsome choir director and music teacher who also helps out with Stephen and the children. The movie is poignant and honest in showing how Jane and Stephen’s marriage leaves both of them exhausted and unfulfilled.As Jane must sometimes literally carry her husband, so does Ms. Jones carry the movie, knitting her brows, setting her jaw and rationing tears and tremors of emotion with proper English discretion. Mr. Redmayne, hunched into a wheelchair, the muscles of his face spread into what looks like a permanent smile, must communicate his character’s feelings almost entirely with his eyes, which are remarkably expressive, conveying Stephen’s mischievous wit as well as his intelligence.AdvertisementBut it is in showing the application of that intelligence that “The Theory of Everything” tumbles into a black hole of biopic banality. My colleague The substance of Stephen’s work is shoehorned into a few compressed, overly dramatic scenes. Equations are scribbled on chalkboards. Fellow physicists proclaim, “It’s brilliant!” or “It’s rubbish!” One of Stephen’s friends diagrams a hypothesis in beer foam on a pub table. Several earnest, potted conversations take place about whether Stephen believes in God, as his wife does. But nothing establishes the stakes in these arguments or dramatizes the drive for knowledge.Movies often have a hard time with science, as they do with art. It is a challenge to show how intuition and inspiration yield insight and creativity, and to capture abstractions in a literal-minded medium. But it isn’t impossible. And in the case of Stephen Hawking, whose Yes, “The Theory of Everything” has a different emphasis. But like so many cinematic lives of the famous, it loses track of the source of its subject’s fame. Its Stephen Hawking is a man who endured a terrible affliction and married a heroically patient woman and also accomplished something remarkable enough to put him on the cover of magazines and earn a medal from the queen. That something, though, remains beyond the audience’s grasp, which means that in a fundamental sense, everything has been left out.“The Theory of Everything” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). A few mild sexual innuendoes.





A version of this review appears in print on November 7, 2014, on Page C12 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;