Fast Five
7.3
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISAt one point during the preordained throwdown between the two colossi who stride through “Fast Five,” They don’t get it, largely because the earth might spin off its axis if they did, though also because the director “Fast Five” is the fifth installment in this surprisingly durable, often absurdly entertaining series, though the fourth chronologically. I didn’t notice or care about the disjointed time frame, what with all the distracting noise on screen. In a free-for-all like this, where the laws of gravity and dictates of narrative logic are left to Han’s seeming resurrection allows him to reunite with Dom and much of the old crew, including Brian (Paul Walker, wooden), a former cop and street-racing fiend who’s in love with Dom’s sister, Mia (Jordana Brewster, leaden). Shortly after the movie opens, these well-matched empty vessels are making goo-goo eyes at each other on a Brazilian train, a lull before the over-the-top robbery that sparks the combustible action. Mr. Lin, a smart tease, waits before showing Mr. Diesel in all his hypertrophied glory. Dom enters as a cubistic enigma — a hammy hand manhandling a gear shift, a bulky outline in long shot — before bursting into full view in a nimbus of white light, a cross slung around his neck to announce his status as the franchise redeemer.AdvertisementHe doesn’t save it alone, having help from AdvertisementManufactured for extreme wows and not a single thought, “Fast Five” is an exemplar of industrial moviemaking calculation, one that combines demographic savvy with revving engines, grunting men, crashing cars and promenading female bumpers that are made for looking but not touching, partly to maintain the child-friendly PG-13 rating, partly to keep the men and action moving relentlessly forward. In between the increasingly over-the-top action scenes that turn Rio into another demolition derby for visiting Americans, the writer Chris Morgan tosses in a little God talk and some manly jabber about family (along with some self-aware laughs), if not enough to provoke even the young and the restless to start texting. The only time you won’t be watching the screen is when your eyes have squeezed shut because you’re laughing so hard.“Fast Five” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Crash, boom, bang, crash, boom, bang.FAST FIVEOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by WITH: Vin Diesel (Dom Toretto), Paul Walker (Brian O’Conner), Jordana Brewster (Mia Toretto), 





A film review on Friday about &#8220;Fast Five,&#8221; the fifth feature released in theaters in the &#8220;Fast and Furious&#8221; series, misstated the film&#8217;s chronological order in the plot of the series. It is the fourth, not the third.A version of this review appears in print on April 29, 2011, on Page C10 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;