P.S. I Love You
7.1
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISIt would be easy to dismiss Movies that make you bawl were sometimes called five-hankie weepies, a sneery label calculated to insult the film and the teary filmgoer alike. There aren’t a lot of these made anymore in America, mainly because most of our movies now are about men and not women. Even so, there are plenty of covert male weepies, films that transform emotions into actions, including acts of violence. The film stars Perhaps because of this masculine-feminine ambiguity, Ms. Swank has not often been cast as a romantic foil opposite men. She wooed another woman beautifully in “Boys Don’t Cry,” and in “Million Dollar Baby” played the adoring daughter to a surrogate father, a symbolic romance conducted principally inside the confines of a boxing ring. One reason she was so good in Brian De Palma’s convoluted noir Advertisement“P.S. I Love You” looks squeaky clean and utterly straight and very much removed from the shadow worlds in which Ms. Swank has done her best work. Yet as directed by AdvertisementMr. LaGravenese, who last directed Ms. Swank in the sympathetic drama “P. S. I Love You” won’t win any awards; it isn’t the sort of work that flatters a critic’s taste. It’s preposterous in big and small matters (Holly complains about a Lower East Side apartment that any sane New Yorker would kill for), and there are several cringe-worthy set pieces, some involving Mr. Butler and a guitar. The film is not a beautiful object or a memorable cultural one, and yet it charms, however awkwardly. Ms. Swank’s ardent sincerity and naked emotionalism dovetail nicely with Mr. LaGravenese’s melodramatic excesses: Together the director and his star create a swell of feeling that helps blunt your reservations about being played as an easy mark, a sap or, worse, a girl, even if that’s exactly what you are.“P.S. I Love You” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Caution: this film may cause sniffles.





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page E7 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;