Dallas Buyers Club
8.0
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTThe Times critic A.O. Scott reviews "Dallas Buyers Club."Skinny as a whippet and fierce as a snapping turtle, Matthew McConaughey brings a jolt of unpredictable energy to When we first meet Ron, he is enjoying the company of two women and preparing to mount an enraged bull. Flamboyantly heterosexual and crudely homophobic, he runs on cigarettes, liquor and arrogance, with an occasional dose of speed or coke to boost his confidence. He is a proud good old boy, but not an especially nice person. In time, of course, his rougher edges will be smoothed away by suffering and compassion, though he will never entirely lose his wild, profane lust for life. He is redeemed, but not fully sanctified.Along the way, Ron tangles with a medical establishment partly blinded by its self-interest. Never an easy patient — he has a habit of unhooking IV drips and bolting from hospital beds — he becomes a thorn in the side of doctors at the hospital where his condition is first diagnosed. He flouts the rules of an experimental drug trial, buys stolen AZT from an orderly, and does a lot of angry shouting at Dr. Eve Saks (Eventually, Dr. Saks will become an ally, as she and Ron — he instinctively, she by more careful scientific means — conclude that high doses of AZT are likely to do more harm than good in fighting H.I.V. Ron, meanwhile, has found his way to Mexico, where a renegade American doctor (Griffin Dunne) persuades him that a combination of drugs and dietary supplements can help the immune system and stabilize the T-cells. Soon he is smuggling pills across the border, at one point disguised as a cancer-stricken priest. Back home, he circumvents the rules against selling unapproved medicines by starting the subscription service that gives the movie its name. Patrons pay a monthly fee and receive regular orders of Ron’s contraband.The lines that stretch outside the door of the club’s headquarters — a few rooms in a shabby motel — suggest the extent of the AIDS epidemic, and other details in the film remind viewers of the often poisonous social climate of the times. Ron’s friends shun him, showering him with the same slurs he had been in the habit of using. The government (embodied by a doughy Food and Drug Administration bureaucrat) is more concerned with procedure than compassion. Doctors and pharmaceutical companies chase glory and profits at the expense of patients.What is largely missing, though, is the sense that Ron’s efforts are part of a larger movement. The problem is not that “Dallas Buyers Club” focuses on a straight hero acting mainly on behalf of gay men. Ron’s bravery and determination are entirely credible, thanks to Mr. McConaughey’s disciplined, high-spirited performance and the filmmakers’ interest in the complexity of the character. But his actions unfold in something of a vacuum. There is little sense of the militancy and passion chronicled, for example, in David France’s documentary, AdvertisementInstead, “Dallas Buyers Club” presents the fable of a homophobe’s awakening, with supporting roles given to Ms. Garner’s kind doctor and to Rayon (Rayon is meant, I suspect, to inject both a dash of camp and a surge of pathos into the movie, but the character helps instead to confine it to the realm of simple and sentimental melodrama. There is warmth and intelligence here, and undeniable sincerity, but also a determination, in the face of much painful and fascinating history, to play it safe.“Dallas Buyers Club” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Sex, death, drugs and hateful language.





A version of this review appears in print on November 1, 2013, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;