The Twilight Saga:  New Moon
4.6
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe big tease turns into the long goodbye in “The Twilight Saga: New Moon,” the juiceless, near bloodless sequel about a teenage girl and the sparkly vampire she, like, totally loves. When last we saw Bella (But love is cruel and sometimes so too are multivolume juggernauts like Stephenie Meyer’s “Twilight” series, which, because they need a prolonged shelf life, are as much about narrative delay (and delay) as release and resolution. That’s particularly the case here given that Edward belongs to a stylish vampire clan that has given up human blood in order to live, if conspicuously out of place, in a Washington town called Forks. Abstinence is the name of this franchise’s clever game  —  a demographically savvy strategy that the filmmakers  exploit with a parade of bared male chests  —  which is why Edward refuses to stick his teeth in Bella’s  unsullied neck, despite her increasingly feverish pleading.The problem, already evident in the first movie, is that a vampire who doesn’t ravish young virgins or at least scarily nuzzle their flesh isn’t much of a vampire or much of an interesting character, which initially makes Edward’s abrupt and extended disappearance from the second film seem like a good idea. Edward saves Bella, but soon decides to split town. Dead or alive, men can be brutes (authors too): he also tells her that she’s not good for him, leaving her bereft. This act of cruelty throws her into a long depression that the director Jacob has secrets of his own that soon emerge, first in the form of some massive biceps. My, what big muscles you have, Bella tells him, nicely exposing her inner wolf. Alas, Bella, whose palpable hunger for Edward gave the first movie much of its energy and interest, has been tamped down for “New Moon,” partly because she’s in mourning, though largely because a ravenous female appetite wouldn’t work with this story’s worldview.  (Melissa Rosenberg’s screenplay is dutifully subservient to the source material.) So, while Jacob’s body grows harder and harder before Bella’s widening eyes, she looks  —  mirroring the audience’s appreciative gaze  —  but doesn’t at first touch. Even when they start fixing up some old motorcycles, hands brushing and engines gunning,  the relationship remains safely in neutral.AdvertisementBella, of course, belongs to Edward, who, though physically gone, hasn’t left the picture. Every so often he  materializes in hazy, semi-transparent form to caution her about something, much as Woody Allen’s fictional mother does when she nags from the sky in AdvertisementThere’s  more  —  the book is another doorstopper  —  crammed between the weeping and dolorous gazes, including a pack of snarling, not terribly effective CGI wolves. They’re amusing if not as diverting as either “The Twilight Saga: New Moon” is rated PG-13. (Parents strongly cautioned.) Some bared fangs, little blood, no sex. THE TWILIGHT SAGANew MoonOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by WITH: 





A film review on Friday about &#8220;The Twilight Saga: New Moon,&#8221; in which the actor Michael Sheen appears, misidentified the creature he has played in other films. It was a werewolf, not a vampire.A version of this review appears in print on November 20, 2009, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;