Manhattan Night
6.2
AdvertisementBy STEPHEN HOLDENAdrien Brody is an actor who knows what he’s good at. And in “Lean and bony-faced, The movie, written and directed by As with many films noirs, the plot of “Manhattan Night” doesn’t bear close scrutiny. The movie is painfully conscious of its 1940s forerunners, in which a lone dedicated gumshoe slithers through the underbelly of a city (usually Los Angeles) and encounters layer upon layer of corruption and evil.A preview of the film.You can tell that “Manhattan Night” wants to be true to that tradition. But Mr. DeCubellis’s efforts, though obviously sincere, fall completely flat. You can’t turn an old upright typewriter into a computer by polishing the keys.AdvertisementCaroline is being threatened by Sebastian Hobbs (Steven Berkoff), the glowering plutocrat who has just purchased the failing tabloid for which Porter writes. Mr. Berkoff plays him as a Sydney Greenstreet type whose behavior doesn’t add up once his secrets are bared. The most disappointing performance is Ms. Strahovski’s as Caroline, a character so lacking in passion or inner life (some frantically steamy love scenes with Porter notwithstanding) that “Manhattan Night” feels blank at the center.Some of the missing vitality is supplied by Mr. Scott’s Simon, a flamboyant player of mind games who in one stunt fakes his own death just for the fun of watching Caroline’s face when she discovers him. Mr. Scott injects the movie with a maniacal zest that suggests Dennis Hopper’s character in “Blue Velvet.” Simon is obsessed with shooting cellphone videos. One involves Hobbs and is so embarrassing he will go to any lengths to retrieve it.Unlike the juicy, overripe prose in the novel from which it was adapted, Mr. DeCubellis’s screenplay is utterly lacking in style. Mr. Brody captures his character’s attitude, but the colorless screenplay robs the character of literary imagination. The look of the movie is as washed-out as the screenplay. Manhattan looks dull and prosaic, without mystery and glamour. The difference between the film and its source is the difference between “night” and “nocturne.”“Manhattan Night”





A version of this review appears in print on May 20, 2016, on Page C9 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;