Predators
6.4
AdvertisementBy STEPHEN HOLDEN“Certainly there is no hunting like the hunting of man, and those who have hunted armed men long enough and liked it, never really care for anything else thereafter.” In As the movie opens, Royce is shown regaining consciousness while spinning downward in freefall; he has no idea of where he is or why he is there. Flailing and howling, he crashes into a jungle moments after his parachute finally opens.So begins the newest of several spinoffs from  
By the time Royce quotes Hemingway, he has long since realized that he is not in Kansas anymore or anywhere else on Earth, for that matter. He is one of eight humans dropped simultaneously by parachute into a lush, tropical jungle on a strange planet.The other Earthlings are a brutal lot and include a Russian soldier (Oleg Taktarov), a fighter in a Sierra Leonean death squad (Mahershalalhashbaz Ali), a serial killer (Walton Goggins), a Yakuza assassin (Louis Ozawa Changchien), a Mexican drug gang enforcer (Danny Trejo) and an Israeli sniper (Alice Braga, the lone woman). They are the kind of people commonly referred to as monsters, and all but one carry heavy weaponry.AdvertisementThe only unarmed new arrival is a suspiciously clean-cut doctor (Topher Grace) who is not as he appears. Laurence Fishburne makes a cameo appearance as an earlier visitor to the planet who claims to have survived for “10 seasons” in this lush land of poisonous flowers and waterfalls,  where the sun doesn’t seem to move across the sky.This genre-savvy film, directed by Nimrod Antal (“Kontroll”) from a screenplay by Michael Finch and Alex Litvak, stuffs Mr. Brody’s mouth with handfuls of sticky verbal popcorn. As he leads his fellow visitors in a life-and-death struggle with an evolving race of invisibility-cloaked extraterrestrial hunters  — the resident predators  — he is the first to realize that they have been selected as game on a hunting reserve. The predators plan to toy with them, then pick them off one by one.Noisy, overstuffed with special effects and embellished with pretentious visual quotations from  
“Predators”  is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It includes abundant profanity and gory violence.PREDATORSOpens on Friday  nationwide. Directed by Nimrod Antal; written by Alex Litvak and Michael Finch, based on characters created by Jim Thomas and John Thomas; director of photography, Gyula Pados; edited by Dan Zimmerman; music by John Debney; production designers, Steve Joyner and Caylah Eddleblute; costumes by Nina Proctor; produced by Robert Rodriguez, John Davis and Elizabeth Avellán; released by 20th Century Fox. Running time: 1 hour 47 minutes.WITH: 





A film review last Friday about “Predators,” directed by Nimrod Antal, referred imprecisely to another of his films. While also known as “Control,” it was released as “Kontroll” and is best known by that title.A version of this review appears in print on July 9, 2010, on Page C10 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;