About Time
7.8
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTRichard Curtis narrates a scene from his comedy featuring Domhnall Gleeson and Rachel McAdams.It is about time we addressed the crisis of British manhood. The once proud nation that in the last century gave us such vital and varied paragons of masculinity as Winston Churchill, Laurence Olivier, Mick Jagger and Fourteen years later, the extent of the decline can be measured in “About Time,” a flimsy bit of mildly romantic, putatively comic Anglophile bait from the writer of The Times critic A.O. Scott reviews "About Time."Mr. Gleeson plays Tim, who introduces us to his family, a painstakingly assembled collection of eccentrics living in a Cornwall mansion just shabby enough not to be ostentatious. The male line, represented by Tim and his dad (Not crazy “Bill &amp; Ted” or “Doctor Who” stuff, mind you, but sensible, modest little jaunts, always backward and for strictly personal reasons. (“No killing Hitler or that sort of thing.”) Dad, who cautions against taking advantage of this ability for selfish purposes, uses it to catch up on his reading. Tim decides that he will use it in the service of love. His trial-and-error courtship of a houseguest named Charlotte (Margot Robbie) prepares him for his pursuit and eventual conquest of Mary (An amusing complication requires him to go back and meet her for the first time again, and his own insecurity compels him to repeat their first night together until he gets everything just right. This is gallant, perhaps, but also a bit creepy. Time travel is always kept secret from the ladies, whose superpower is to pretend to be exasperated with men they unreservedly adore. This works for Mary, and for Tim’s mother (Lindsay Duncan). His sister, Kit Kat (Lydia Wilson), is a sadder case. Her whimsy and cleverness lead her to alcoholism and a bad boyfriend, and it falls to her brother to rescue her from the consequences of her choices.Kit Kat’s unhappy circumstances at least lend a bit of drama to a film that seems almost militant in its complacency. Its ideal of perfect happiness — Tim’s goal — is the dull, frictionless bliss of television commercials in which people are good-looking and superficially clever without actually being interesting. Occasional bouts of sorrow or uncertainty make Tim a better person: not just better than his old self, but also better (in spite of his stammering demurrals) than everybody else. Including you.AdvertisementThis does not make him especially winning company, though Ms. McAdams endures both him and an unfortunate hairstyle with her usual aplomb. (What is her thing with temporal wanderers, by the way? First there was Eric Bana in The self-satisfaction that “About Time” radiates is so strong that it eclipses any curiosity the audience might bring. You may wish, when it’s over, that you could borrow Tim’s skill, reclaim the two hours and buy a ticket for something else. (You have a lot of good choices at the moment.) Not that it really makes a difference. By the time you get home from the multiplex, it will be as if the whole thing never happened.“About Time” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). A bit of swearing and sex, mostly discreet and well mannered.





A version of this review appears in print on November 1, 2013, on Page C13 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;