Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time
6.6
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISFirst the United States invaded the Middle East,   and now Hollywood has swooped in to finish the job: one day after the As an example of the new pop-cultural crusades “Prince of Persia” is at once generically insulting and relatively innocuous. Set in the sixth century, the story involves Dastan (Mr. Gyllenhaal), the adopted son of King Sharaman (Ronald Pickup), who plucked the wee boy out of the streets to raise the child alongside his royal spawn, Tus (Richard Coyle) and Garsiv (Toby Kebbell). The film, directed by Cut and chiseled, his pumped-up pectorals flashing, Mr. Gyllenhaal offers an updated spin on the mysterious Oriental lover of cinematic yesteryear. More butch than the silent-screen god Valentino (best known for playing the Sheik, an Arab rather than a Persian heartbreaker), Mr. Gyllenhaal instead follows — and runs and leaps — in the robustly muscular and acrobatic tradition of Douglas Fairbanks, the silent-film star whose Middle Eastern exploits were aggressively masculine. Granted, the resurrection of a sexpot Middle Eastern hero (even one played by a non-Persian actor) might not seem like progress. But given the strained relations between the United States and Iran, it’s a representation worth noting, particularly since Dastan’s worth is finally measured by his more peaceable actions.This topical hook doesn’t sink very deep, admittedly; like a lot of action flicks, “Prince of Persia” exploits the headlines for familiar genre high jinks. Dastan hooks up with a pouty princess (an unfortunate Gemma Arterton) and engages in some funny business with a shady wise-cracking sheik (Alfred Molina, fortunately). Ben Kingsley shows up  as Basil Rathbone, or rather Nizam, the king’s silky, suspicious  brother. Shot in Morocco and in Pinewood Studios in Britain, the film is crammed with swirling sand, milling crowds, computer-generated cities and assorted narrative bits and pieces, some borrowed from the studio playbook (everyone speaks in a British accent, even, alas, Mr. Gyllenhaal), others recycled from the video game series by Jordan Mechner, who has a story credit.The movie’s video game roots are most evident in the mechanized feel of many of the whiplash camera movements, which sharply zig and zag as if created by algorithms. Considering that he made the move from the art house to the blockbuster a few years ago with AdvertisementFor the most part this is perfectly painless mush. The movie is irrepressibly silly — what were you expecting? — but a few hours of Mr. Gyllenhaal jumping around in leather and fluttering his long lashes has its dumb-fun appeal, as does the sight of Mr. Molina planting a kiss on an ostrich in a big-screen spectacle that’s as much indebted to newfangled technologies as to old-fashioned Hollywood narrative strategies. If nothing else, it’s entertaining to think about how this mash-up of ancient Persian heroics and headline news might sit with the Iranian powers that be. In March 2009 a spokesman for the Iranian president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, demanded an apology from Hollywood for “insults and accusations against the Iranian nation” over the last 30 years. Clearly, they had no idea they were about to be Bruckheimer-ed.Advertisement“Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Squeaky-clean carnage.Prince of Persia:
The Sands of TimeOpens on Friday nationwide.
Directed by Mike Newell; written by
Boaz Yakin, Doug Miro and Carlo Bernard,
based on a screen story and the video
game series created by Jordan Mechner;
director of photography, John Seale;
edited by Michael Kahn, Mick Audsley
and Martin Walsh; music by Harry Gregson-
Williams; production designer, Wolf
Kroeger; costumes by Penny Rose; produced
by Jerry Bruckheimer; released by
Walt Disney Pictures and Jerry Bruckheimer
Films. Running time: 1 hour 43
minutes.WITH: Jake Gyllenhaal (Dastan), Gemma
Arterton (Tamina), Ben Kingsley (Nizam),
Alfred Molina (Sheik Amar), Steve
Toussaint (Seso), Toby Kebbell (Garsiv),
Richard Coyle (Tus), Ronald Pickup
(King Sharaman) and Reece Ritchie
(Bis).





A version of this review appears in print on May 28, 2010, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;