Misery Loves Comedy
6.3
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTInterviews with comedians blended with archival footage and photos explore how professional performers transform pain into humor.It’s a truism that stand-up comedy is harder than it looks. Though it may seem like something anyone can do, telling jokes in a room full of strangers is something best left to professionals. It’s a demanding craft, and also, when approached with the proper mix of discipline and inspiration, an art.All of that applies equally to documentary filmmaking. Comedians don’t get points for trying, and documentaries should not be judged on their intentions. “Misery Loves Comedy,” Kevin Pollak’s survey of the opinions of a bunch of professionally funny people, is an evident labor of love and also a work of grating amateurism. Mr. Pollak is an accomplished actor with ample comic gifts — he had a memorable moment in “The Aristocrats,” Penn Jillette and Paul Provenza’s 2005 documentary about a notoriously filthy joke — and impressive access to the famous and the talented, including Mr. Jillette.Mr. Pollak, never seen and occasionally heard on screen, invites his interlocutors to reflect on the meaning of the stand-up life. Not all of them are best known as comedians. Tom Hanks shares some thoughts, as do James L. Brooks, Christopher Guest, the guys from the Opie and Anthony radio program and Jason Alexander, forever George Costanza to “Seinfeld” fans. Judd Apatow is also on hand to talk about, among other things, his early encounters with Jerry Seinfeld (who is not in the movie, though Larry David is) and other titans in the field. The roster of interviewees also includes Freddie Prinze Jr., who reflects on the legacy of his father, a brilliant young performer who took his own life in 1977.The elder Prinze and Richard Pryor are invoked, along with Lenny Bruce and George Carlin, as formative influences on many of the assembled jokesters, though it is striking that nearly all of those jokesters are white. Whoopi Goldberg is the only African-American, which is astonishing when you consider just how many talented black performers are part of the current comedy boom. There are a handful of women, including Ms. Goldberg, Lisa Kudrow, Amy Schumer and Janeane Garofalo. But the overwhelming impression that the movie leaves behind — or maybe the assumption with which it started — is that white guys are funnier.I’m not pointing this out to be politically correct — some of my best friends are funny white guys — but rather to note one of several ways the film falls short in exploring its chosen topic. The “misery” that is proposed as a source of comic inspiration — and that not all of the comedians admit to — is fairly circumscribed. You felt insecure as a kid, misunderstood by your family or mistreated by your peers, and you compensated by making people laugh. This may be a universal experience, but specific varieties of it, collective as well as individual, have been the great sources of American humor. Scarcely a word is breathed about religion, sex, race or money, as though Mr. Pollak were convening a prim dinner party at which such matters could not be mentioned.Instead, he invites his guests to traffic in abstraction. They wax philosophical on the nature of the job, but rarely tell stories about what it’s like for them. We learn something about what it feels like to bomb on stage — and to kill — but very little about the creative process or about the professional landscape. “Misery Loves Comedy” is organized into haphazard chapters that keep us perpetually on the surface, protecting the secret lore of a guild supposedly devoted to truth-telling and self-exposure.AdvertisementSome fans will find the movie irresistible, but even a die-hard comedy geek, eager to hang out with Jimmy Fallon or Richard Lewis or Bob Saget, is likely to grow bored over the course of 95 minutes. There is better comedy, deeper misery and greater wisdom to be found on YouTube.




A version of this review appears in print on April 24, 2015, on Page C8 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;