One Day
7.0
Advertisement A.&nbsp;O. SCOTT“One Day”Being British, the two main characters — their names are Emma and Dex, and they are played by As far as I could tell, that tune is not heard on the soundtrack, though much else is, including a lush, swooning, deliciously anachronistic orchestral score by Rachel Portman and a handful of period-appropriate numbers. By the final credits, as a song by Elvis Costello drowns out the snifflings of the audience — late-season allergies? mourning for lost youth? This does not strike me as entirely an accident, or a wayward interpretation on my part. Nor is it entirely a bad thing. The fondly pirated compilation of moods and messages gleaned from vinyl and committed to cassette — that’s right, kids, they were actually, physically tapes back in the old days — may be the emblematic artifact of the generation to which Emma and Dex belong. And as it traces the orbit of their devoted friendship and almost-love, “One Day” turns an episodic story into an anthology of feelings and associations, many familiar, a few surprising, some embarrassing and one or two worth holding onto.AdvertisementThis makes it tricky to judge the film, directed by Lone Scherfig, as a whole, but easy to enjoy it in pieces. To recast the metaphor for the current era, it may even be desirable to reshuffle the tracks to suit diverse sensibilities. Did you like AdvertisementOr perhaps you were a fan of “Four Weddings and a Funeral.” (You’re on your own there, though I’m grateful that it briefly revived interest in As does nearly everything in Emma and Dex’s lives. Now and then — early and late — something momentous happens on July 15, but for the most part it is an ordinary day, and we glimpse only a piece of it, the year signaled by numerals on the screen. Some years are skipped over altogether, and others are indicated by a few seconds of actions: an unanswered phone call; a dive into a swimming pool. When we do linger with Emma and Dex, separately or together, some discreet exposition catches us up on what we need to know.It starts in a rush of youthful sexual ardor, as the two of them, thrown together after a night out with friends, tumble back to Emma’s room as dawn approaches. Though they will remember this not-quite tryst as a “near miss,” it cements an affection that waxes and wanes over the years. Will they at last become lovers or allow their connection to lapse, awaiting the invention of Facebook?This simple question generates quite a bit of curiosity and suspense, but “One Day” is at its best — observant, relaxed, touching and charming — when the central couple are apart. As they make their way through professional ups and downs and serious relationships with other people, the movie opens up and allows its attention to wander into odd corners and byways, encountering vivid, fully dimensional minor characters along the way. Among these are Ken Stott and Patricia Clarkson as Dex’s parents, and Rafe Spall and Romola Garai as the poor souls who would appear, on paper, to be perfect matches for Emma and Dex.When those two are together, much is made of their contrasting temperaments and backgrounds. She is bookish, serious and comes from a (never seen) family of modest means, while he is dashing, irresponsible and wealthy. Mr. Sturgess does what he can to make you stop thinking about Hugh Grant, while Ms. Hathaway once again demonstrates her ability to be more appealing than her attractive co-star and more fascinating than her picturesque surroundings. (See also “Love and Other Drugs” and the most recent Oscar broadcast.)Ms. Scherfig, a veteran of the Danish Dogme 95 movement, whose previous English-language films are In deference to the spoiler-sensitive, I’ll tread lightly here, but what happens near the end of “One Day” is likely to have a decisive effect on your opinion of the movie. Perhaps you will have seen this climax coming all along, and maybe you will find it splendidly moving. On the other hand, you might cringe to see the film’s wit and delicacy ruined by maudlin excess and wish you could remix the tape to get rid of that song you always hated.“One Day” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). A bit of sex, and much discussion of and desire for same.Opens on Friday nationwide.Directed by Lone Scherfig; written by David Nicholls, based on his novel; director of photography, Benoit Delhomme; edited by Barney Pilling; music by Rachel Portman; production design by Mark Tildesley; costumes by Odile Dicks-Mireaux; produced by Nina Jacobson; released by Focus Features.AdvertisementWITH: Anne Hathaway (Emma), Jim Sturgess (Dexter), Patricia Clarkson (Alison), Ken Stott (Steven), Romola Garai (Sylvie) and Rafe Spall (Ian).





A movie review on Friday about &#8220;One Day,&#8221; from the Danish director Lone Scherfig, misidentified the language spoken in &#8220;Italian for Beginners,&#8221; one of her earlier films. It was Danish, not English.A version of this review appears in print on August 19, 2011, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;