Terminator Salvation
6.6
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTT“Terminator Salvation”A detailed recap of the franchise’s empretzeled chronology will not be possible here. But recall that, way back in 1984, a mean and muscular killing machine, the T-800, showed up in Los Angeles spouting Austrian-accented catchphrases and trying to kill Sarah Connor, who was played by Linda Hamilton. Some of us still harbor fond memories of Ms. Hamilton’s way with a pump-action shotgun, and miss her all the more when her voice is heard on old tape recordings in the new movie, from which she is otherwise absent.By 1991 and And that’s without getting into the metaphysics of time travel, the self-updating allegory of technological anxiety, “The Sarah Connor Chronicles” on television or the complex development of a malignant military application called Skynet. Since the last installment, “Rise of the Machines,” a fairly pedestrian action film released in 2003, Skynet, having become “self-aware” (more, perhaps, than the films themselves), unleashed a nuclear holocaust and now wants to wipe out the resistance and the rest of humanity along with it. Eventually it will master time travel, but that will be in a future sequel, which makes the current one an act of extortion by Warner Brothers. If not enough people buy tickets to “Terminator Salvation,” we may never find out just how After an early bit of foreshadowing set on death row in California in the present decade and featuring a bald AdvertisementWright also stumbles into a quasi-romance with Blair Williams (Moon Bloodgood), one of Connor’s lieutenants and a character who pays homage to Ms. Hamilton’s pioneering action-heroine achievements. (AdvertisementThe palette is a dull steely gray, coarsened by dust and rust and occasionally illuminated by a bright orange fireball. And the action, in spite of some aerial special effects and a few high-tech battles, is accordingly loud and blunt, a symphony of screaming gears, anguished torque and thumping collisions of metal and flesh. As the floor of the screening room rumbled and the walls seemed to shake, I began to wonder if Skynet were not a subsidiary of the Dolby Laboratories, softening up a few human targets before the big battle.But the movie, directed by McG (yes, him, the one-named auteur at the helm of the Among these are efficient, reasonably swift storytelling — the movie, less than two hours long, is densely populated with semi-important characters and crammed with exposition and incident, but it rarely feels busy or talky — and a mastery of the vernacular of chases, fights, explosions and crashes. McG may not yet have a signature style — he lacks the baroque vulgarity of Michael Bay (It has been a long time since the Terminator cycle served as a showcase for state-of-the-art cinematic special effects. The morphing of Robert Patrick’s flesh into metal in James Cameron’s Which is fitting, since part of the point of the Terminator movies is to register ambivalence about technological progress, which fills our lives with all kinds of cool, convenient stuff that somehow brings an intimation of our eventual obsolescence. “Terminator Salvation,” digitally engineered to approximate a rough, analog feel, is less a cautionary tale than a consumer advisory. Enjoy your new gadgets, but don’t let them out of your sight, and don’t forget where the off switch is.“Terminator Salvation” is rated PG-13TERMINATOR SALVATIONOpens on Thursday nationwide. Directed by McG; written by John Brancato and Michael Ferris; director of photography, Shane Hurlbut; edited by Conrad Buff; music by Danny Elfman; production designer, Martin Laing; produced by Moritz Borman, Jeffrey Silver, Victor Kubicek and Derek Anderson; released by Warner Brothers Pictures. Running time: 1 hour 47 minutes.WITH: 





A film review on Thursday about &#8220;Terminator Salvation&#8221; misidentified the character who has a &#8220;quasi-romance&#8221; with Blair Williams. He is Marcus Wright, not Kyle Reese.A version of this review appears in print on , on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;