Back to the Future III
7.0
LEAD: The thing you have to remember about time travel is that it's notoriously unreliable. Baggage is always being sent on to the wrong epoch, and return tickets are never guaranteed.
The thing you have to remember about time travel is that it's notoriously unreliable. Baggage is always being sent on to the wrong epoch, and return tickets are never guaranteed.

Doc Brown's DeLorean, the vehicle of choice in ''Back to the Future'' (1985) and ''Back to the Future, Part II,'' released last November, has zoomed around from 1985 to 1955 to 2015 and back again.

Now, in ''Back to the Future, Part III'' (which might as accurately be called ''Back to the Future, Part II, 2''), the DeLorean has somehow transported Doc, the deliriously manic scientist played by Christopher Lloyd, to the slightly Wild West of 1885.

Meanwhile, his pal, Marty McFly (Michael J. Fox), who is in 1955 (or is it 1985? It's not always clear) finds a newspaper item reporting Doc's death on Sept. 7, 1885.

The only thing a pal can do is go back to 1885 and warn Doc about his impending demise. Thus, possibly, Marty can change the future from which he has taken temporary leave. Am I going too fast?  Robert Zemeckis, the director, and Bob Gale, the writer, clearly relish these compounding conundrums of time, though in their new film, the conundrums are not as prominently featured as the comic western that the time machine makes possible.

The producers swear that ''Back to the Future, Part III'' is the end of what they modestly call their trilogy, but the new movie, which was shot back-to-back with ''Part II,'' looks as if it could be the beginning of a continuing television series.

Don't worry that the trusty DeLorean is last seen in ''Part III'' in pieces the size of microchips. Total destruction of the monster never fazed the producers of succeeding ''Frankenstein'' movies.

Considering the possibilities of the era, ''Part III'' has an astonishingly small story, which is supplemented by a number of gags that are more cheerful than laugh-provoking. It's quite nice seeing Hill City, the principal location of the two earlier films, as it might have looked 105 years ago: a frontier town with a Western saloon, a courthouse under construction, a schoolmarm (Mary Steenburgen) and the first McFlys, newly arrived from Ireland.

When Marty meets his own great-great-grandfather (also played by Mr. Fox), he avoids confusion by adopting a fake name: Clint Eastwood. Marty's 20th-century Hill City nemesis, Biff Tannen (Thomas F. Wilson), turns up as Biff's look-alike forebear nicknamed Mad Dog Tannen, because of his temper and tendency to drool.

When Marty tries to avoid a shootout with Mad Dog, it provides an opportunity for someone to say, ''If you don't go out there, everybody will say that Clint Eastwood is the biggest yellow-belly in the West.''

That line locates the film's funnybone.

Though Mr. Fox is still the nominal star of ''Back to the Future, Part III,'' the film is fueled mainly by Mr. Lloyd, his wild mop of white hair and his intense, lunatic optimism. This time around, Doc also has a love-interest, Clara, the schoolteacher played by Miss Steenburgen. The roles aren't exactly overwritten, but Mr. Lloyd and Miss Steenburgen share a kind of loose-cannon craziness that works well for the movie.

Among other things, ''Back to the Future, Part III'' may be the first and last movie in which Miss Steenburgen gets a chance to hang upside down on the side of a speeding steam engine. She does it well. Another key sequence is set in the Monument Valley associated with the cinema of John Ford. The locale is treated with respect.

Respect, in fact, may be what ''Back to the Future, Part III'' has too much of. Except for Mr. Lloyd, the film is so sweet-natured and bland that it is almost instantly forgettable. 

''Back to the Future, Part III,'' which has been rated PG (''Parental Guidance Suggested''), includes some mildly vulgar language. 
