The Vow
6.8
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTAt the beginning of When we first meet them, Paige and Leo — the dimply and adorable More unsettling is that Paige seems to revert to an earlier version of herself. When she and Leo met, she was estranged from her wealthy suburban parents. She had dropped out of law school to become a sculptor and dumped a skinny fiancé named Jeremy (Scott Speedman). Now that old life threatens to reclaim her. Mom and Dad (Jessica Lange and Sam Neill) are not crazy about Leo, who runs a recording studio and spouts random bits of rock-’n’-roll trivia at the dinner table, and Jeremy still carries a torch. Paige, meanwhile, having lost her touch with clay, lightens her hair and trades in her bohemian garb for preppier attire. “She’s turned into this sweater-set-wearing, mojito-drinking sorority girl,” Leo complains to a friend.“Like a Stepford wife?”“Yeah.”But not really. AdvertisementNever mind. “The Vow” is designed for comfort, not shock. But even by the standards of commercial melodrama it’s a pretty weak brew. Ms. McAdams and Mr. Tatum have both done time in the Nicholas Sparks school of tragico-preposterous inspiration — she in The dialogue — in particular Leo’s half-literate voice-over narration — is atrocious. The secondary characters are less vivid than the extras in an average non-Super Bowl television commercial, with the notable exception of Ms. Lange, whose one longish scene is the film’s only moment of eccentric, unpredictable passion. Otherwise stuff just seems to happen, and not much seems to be at stake, which is odd given that the movie’s ostensible subject is the complex interplay of heart and brain.“The Vow” ends up taking a pro-amnesia line, in two different ways. First by suggesting that memory loss can be a great opportunity to start fresh, re-examine options and resolve long-standing wardrobe issues, and also in its exemplary commitment to its own forgetability.“The Vow” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). A little swearing, a few sexual references and — spoiler alert! — a glimpse of Mr. Tatum’s bare behind.





A version of this review appears in print on February 10, 2012, on Page C16 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;