From Dusk Till Dawn
7.3
The vampire western "From Dusk Till Dawn" raises more than the usual curiosity about who will come back from the dead. Quentin Tarantino, last seen doing himself serious harm in "Four Rooms," wrote this film's screenplay and plays a starring role. Robert Rodriguez, who made the only watchable "Rooms" segment after the fiery but uneven "Desperado," tries directing his most ambitious feature. 

     And George Clooney, whose previous feature film credits include "Return of the Killer Tomatoes," goes from television stardom on "E. R." to another try at  leading-man stature on the big screen. Not many television actors make the transition easily, but not many look this much like Cary Grant. 
So "From Dusk Till Dawn" has the feeling of high-stakes poker. And for a while it even holds a winning hand. Certain ground rules apply: This is violent, profane film making, just as "Pulp Fiction" was, and it revels in pitch-black satire that delights in meanness and mayhem. Much of Mr. Tarantino's sharpest dialogue involves gun-related threats, as when Mr. Clooney tells a hostage not to flee "because I got six little friends and they can all run faster than you can." For his part, Mr. Rodriguez has made his trademark the sight of unperturbed heroes walking away from burning buildings without looking back. 

      During a promising if down-and-dirty first hour, "From Dusk Till Dawn" introduces two of these hard guys: the Gecko brothers, Seth (Mr. Clooney) and Richard (Mr. Tarantino), hoodlums on the run. Beginning in mid-holdup at the colorful desert outpost called Benny's World of Liquor, the film follows the Geckos as they head for Mexico. Played with grit and no apologies by the truly dashing Mr. Clooney (with flames tattooed across his neck), Seth is the brains of the operation. 

     Richard, played by Mr. Tarantino in a sly, mercifully restrained mood, is the head case and convicted sex offender of the duo. He's had a hole shot clear through his hand -- thanks to deadpan special effects that Mr. Rodriguez treats  as a comic asset -- before the opening credits are even over. 

     Then these two (describing themselves as "a couple of real mean motor scooters" in the script's jokey pop argot) meet the film's innocent characters:  the Fuller family, driving through the desert in a recreational vehicle and unlucky enough to stop at the Geckos' motel. It's one of the film's little jokes that Juliette Lewis is cast as the clean-living ingenue while Harvey Keitel, behind glasses and a bushy beard, plays the ex-pastor who is her solemn father.  Ernest Liu nicely holds his own in this strange company as Mr. Keitel's son. 

     Kidnapped by the Geckos, the Fullers wind up in Mexico at the sleazy, stripper-filled bar that becomes the film's principal set. It's here that "From  Dusk Till Dawn," as if suffering the effects of a vampire's bite, turns into something entirely different. Suddenly the special effects come full throttle and the film becomes an all-out bloodbath, as the bikers and topless dancers at  the bar morph into blood-sucking monsters, and the Fullers and Geckos have the chance to battle real evil. When Mr. Rodriguez stages a fight like this, the veins spurt and the eyeballs pop and the body parts wind up all over the floor. 

     A bit of history: Mr. Tarantino originally wrote this screenplay while still  a video store clerk, having been commissioned for the job by Robert Kurtzman, who ran a special-effects makeup company. (Mr. Kurtzman has a story credit here.) As that suggests, visual tricks are a lot of the finished film's raison d'etre. But they're tricks that narrow its audience to viewers who enjoy watching flesh melt. 

     Mr. Rodriguez demonstrates his talents more clearly than ever -- he's visually inventive, quick-witted and a fabulous editor -- while still hampering  himself with sophomoric material. The latter part of "From Dusk Till Dawn" is so relentless that it's as if a spigot has been turned on and then broken. Though some of the tricks are entertainingly staged, the film loses its clever edge when its action heats up so gruesomely and exploitatively that there's no time for talk. (To Mr. Rodriguez's credit, he does include such nonverbal witticisms  as a nasty rock-and-roll version of "Mary Had a Little Lamb" and a groin-level automatic weapon that will have to be seen to be believed.) 

     Wandering through the lurid free-for-all that reduces this promising film to  cult horror status are Salma Hayek (dancing with a huge white snake), Fred Williamson (at one point holding a dripping heart in his hand), Cheech Marin (playing three roles, at least two more than necessary), a lot of the minor players from "Desperado" and the horror director and makeup expert Tom Savini (playing a character named Sex Machine). There are more notable walk-ons and minor touches here, but audiences will need the stamina to look. 

     Mr. Keitel deserves special mention for playing a dull, quiet pastor with unassuming skill. The character may take a back seat to the flashier Geckos, but Mr. Keitel is not easily upstaged. 

  "From Dusk Till Dawn" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It is violent, gory, sexist and exploitative in ways that, for all its facetiousness, are real. 

  FROM DUSK TILL DAWN 

  Directed by Robert Rodriguez; written by Quentin Tarantino; story by Robert Kurtzman; director of photography, Guillermo Navarro; edited by Mr. Rodriguez; music by Graeme Revell; production designer, Cecilia Montiel; produced by Gianni Nunnari and Meir Teper; released by Miramax Dimension Films. Running time: 100 minutes. This film is rated R. WITH: Harvey Keitel (Jacob Fuller), George Clooney (Seth Gecko), Quentin Tarantino (Richard Gecko), Juliette Lewis (Kate Fuller), Cheech Marin (Border Guard/Chet Pussy/Carlos), Fred Williamson (Frost), Salma Hayek (Santanico Pandemonium), Tom Savini (Sex Machine) and Ernest Liu (Scott Fuller). 
