Captain America: The First Avenger
6.9
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTT“Captain America: The First Avenger” turns out in the end — and this is really the opposite of a spoiler — to have been a two-hour teaser for another movie. That picture, foreshadowed in the second But in the meantime this origin story, directed by With a dusty color scheme that evokes newsprint and cheap ink, and a production design that captures the Deco-inflected futurism of an earlier time, the movie is nostalgic without making a big fuss about it. And though there are plenty of the usual digital enhancements and overscaled effects, the pseudo-operatic grandiosity that has become a staple of the genre is mostly missing. Instead “Captain America,” like its unapologetically corny hero, is propelled by unpretentious and plucky ingenuity.Some of this can be attributed to Mr. Johnston, whose affection for the pop culture of the past was charmingly displayed 20 years ago in AdvertisementUnlike many of his peers, the Captain, alter ego of a scrawny “kid from Brooklyn” named Steve Rogers, is endowed with fairly modest powers. He is injected with a special serum that builds his muscles and improves his metabolism, a bit of juicing that today’s professional athletes might envy, since it is not accompanied by side effects or public disgrace.AdvertisementThere is a wonderful scene in which Steve — who had previously been a slightly grotesque figure formed by superimposing He is even better when conveying the newly minted Captain’s dismay at being turned into a novelty act, sent out on the road with a line of chorus girls and a stage Hitler to sell war bonds. The montage of his tour, a tumble of peppy music and gee-whiz hamminess, may be the movie’s best sequence, a surprisingly witty and sincere exercise in post-postmodern self-referentiality. Before he has accomplished very much, Steve is a media-made hero, starring in comic books and serials intended to boost American morale.This makes him just like the real — which is to say the original, fictional — Captain America. He collides with reality (or at least with combat-movie-style realism) when an audience of G.I.’s in Italy fails to be impressed by his cartoon antics. But then the Captain, and the movie, zoom permanently back into the cartoon realm, springing into action to fight a villain so crazy and diabolical that he makes the Nazis uncomfortable.His name is Schmidt, he is played by the reliably sinister Hugo Weaving, and he is in possession of a magic Norse ice cube (or something) that makes him powerful enough to have a lot of weapons for Captain America to smash with his shield. Mr. Evans is genial and easy on the eyes, but a superhero with a mask, whether bland or brooding, is rarely as interesting as the sidekicks and baddies who surround him.Mr. Weaving, with a bright red, noseless face and a classic Hollywood “Chermann” accent, is a fine nemesis, and “Captain America” is well stocked with colorful supporting players. Among them are Tommy Lee Jones as a crusty Army officer; Stanley Tucci as an émigré scientist; Dominic Cooper as Howard Stark, an important link to Robert Downey Jr. and the “Iron Man” franchise; and Toby Jones as the assistant bad guy.Captain America’s team includes Derek Luke, Neal McDonough and Ken Choi; his best pal is Sebastian Stan. The British actress Hayley Atwell, as Agent Carter, the hero’s love interest and supervisor, takes advantage of the opportunity to be more than just the Girl, though she is basically that. Mr. Johnston and the screenwriters, Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely, clearly appreciate the snappy romantic chemistry of dames and fellas in the movies of the ’40s, and they also accommodate the modern expectation that a woman in an action movie should be able to throw a punch and handle a firearm.There is enough energy and imagination packed into “Captain America” to make you a bit sorry to see it all evaporate at the end. It might have been nice to be able to look forward to a few more sequels in the old, cheap, Saturday matinee style that the movie, at its best, pays tribute to, instead of another slick blockbuster. But progress is relentless, and superheroes can stay current only by changing with the times and synergizing their commercial powers.That was a challenge for Steve Rogers in the ’60s, when Marvel brought him out of retirement as an avatar of Greatest Generation values in a world of baby boomer alienation. It is nice, all these years later, to see him restored to his native time, and it’s also a little sad. “Captain America” is a reminder, at once successful and self-defeating, of the kind of fun that comics used to be.Advertisement“Captain America” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). A lot of guns.CAPTAIN AMERICAThe First AvengerOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on July 22, 2011, on Page C4 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;