The Wolf of Wall Street
8.2
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTThe Times critic A. O. Scott reviews "The Wolf of Wall Street."Future archaeologists, digging through the digital and physical rubble of our long-gone civilization in search of reasons for its collapse, will be greatly helped if they unearth a file containing From its opening sequence — a quick, nasty, unapologetic tour through its main character’s vices and compulsions, during which he crash-lands a helicopter on the grounds of his Long Island estate and (not simultaneously) shares cocaine with a call girl in an anatomically creative manner — to its raw, chaotic finish, “The Wolf of Wall Street” hums with vulgar, voyeuristic energy. It has been a while since Mr. Scorsese has thrown himself into filmmaking with this kind of exuberance. “At the center of the whirlwind is Jordan Belfort, a crooked stock trader played by Mr. Belfort’s book is more boast than confession, and Mr. Winter (whose television credits include “The Sopranos” and “Boardwalk Empire”) declines to treat his rise and fall as a fable of redemption. As portrayed in the movie, Jordan Belfort is a thoroughly despicable human being, but one whose charm — the ineradicable trace of melancholy furrowing Mr. DiCaprio’s brow, the still-boyish openness of his smile — makes actively despising him almost impossible.AdvertisementAfter meeting Jordan at his saturnalian peak, we flash back to his beginnings as an eager newbie at a reputable firm, where he is introduced to the mysteries and pleasures of the trade by a gleefully Mephistophelean Matthew McConaughey. This is less a fall from grace than a rite of passage, and after the crash of 1987 flushes Jordan out of the real Wall Street, he finds a way to recreate its worst and most attractive aspects. Taking inspiration from a storefront penny-stock outfit, he conjures up a high-profile company with the fake blue-blood name of Stratton Oakmont.AdvertisementAs my colleague Anyway, what makes “The Wolf of Wall Street” a vital and troubling document of the present is not so much Jordan’s business plan — he tells us repeatedly that it’s too complicated and boring to explain — as his approach to life. It’s a truism that every salesman sells himself, and as Stratton Oakmont grows, Jordan becomes an evangelist of easy money and unbridled pleasure. The ambitious brokers who flock to its trading floor are lured by the promise of huge bonuses and endless debauchery, but their enterprise is held together, above all, by the boss’s charisma.His first convert is Donnie Azoff (Jonah Hill, a manic, tubby Joe Pesci to Mr. DiCaprio’s Robert De Niro), a middle-class nebbish who gathers a bunch of like-minded losers into a recognizably Scorsesean crew. (Eventually Jordan’s dad, an accountant played by Rob Reiner, overcomes his initial reservations and joins the fun.) These guys are less violent than the mobsters of What they do is consistently appalling and sometimes very funny. The comedy in “The Wolf of Wall Street” can be deliciously brutal — an extended sequence in which Jordan and Donnie are so blitzed on Quaaludes that they can barely move is sure to join Mr. Scorsese’s greatest-hits reel — but the movie laughs with Jordan as well as at him. And, intentionally or not, it makes a fetish of his selfish bad-boy lifestyle.This brings me back to the question I started with, which perhaps should be posed another way: Is this movie satire or propaganda? Its treatment of women is the strongest evidence for the second option. On his way up, Jordan trades in his first wife, a sweet hometown girl named Teresa (Cristin Milioti), for a blonder, bustier new model named Naomi (Margot Robbie), whose nakedness is offered to the audience as a special bonus. (Mr. DiCaprio never shows as much as she does.) The movie’s misogyny is not the sole property of its characters, nor is the humiliation and objectification of women — an insistent, almost compulsive motif — something it merely depicts. Mr. Scorsese, never an especially objective sociologist, is at least a participant-observer.His camera has always operated partly in the service of his id. This is a virtue and a failing, since his best films register a passionate fascination with the frequently ugly worlds they depict, a reluctance (or inability) to step back. “The Wolf of Wall Street” is no exception, and in this case it may be unfair to demand from the director a clarity of judgment that virtually nobody else — in business, politics, journalism or art — seems able or willing to articulate.Does “The Wolf of Wall Street” condemn or celebrate? Is it meant to provoke disgust or envy? These may be, in the present phase of American civilization, distinctions without a meaningful difference behind them. If you walk away feeling empty and demoralized, worn down by the tackiness and aggression of the spectacle you have just witnessed, perhaps you truly appreciate the film’s critical ambitions. If, on the other hand, you ride out of the theater on a surge of adrenaline, intoxicated by its visual delights and visceral thrills, it’s possible you missed the point. The reverse could also be true. To quote another one of Mr. Scorsese’s magnetic, monstrous heroes, Jake LaMotta, “The Wolf of Wall Street” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Naked women, naked greed.





A version of this review appears in print on December 25, 2013, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;