22 Jump Street
7.1
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe Times critic Manohla Dargis reviews “22 Jump Street.”More is more and is, at times, just right in Submission is one of the foundations of mass culture: If you bludgeon them, they will come. The pop-culture savants behind “22 Jump Street” understand this so well that they’ve folded this ethos into the movie, which is bookended by self-amused references to its status as franchise fodder. Schmidt (Mr. Hill) and Jenko (Mr. Tatum) enter with their chief, Hardy (Nick Offerman), announcing that they’ve been tapped to reproduce their first success. “Nobody cared about the Jump Street reboot,” Hardy deadpans, staring at the guys while all but winking at the camera. But because it worked, “this department has invested a lot of money to make sure Jump Street keeps going.”A scene from the film featuring Jonah Hill and Channing Tatum.This kind of self-consciousness is a cornerstone of comedy, deployed by everyone from Buster Keaton to Bugs Bunny and Stephen Colbert, and can be usefully self-regarding. (Look at me, folks!) By pulling back the curtain immediately on the sequel, the movie’s behind-the-scenes smarty pants — it was written by Michael Bacall, Oren Uziel and Rodney Rothman, and directed by Phil Lord and And so it goes in “22 Jump Street,” which returns Schmidt and Jenko to school, this time for a stint in college. There, at the fictional, MC State (one billion presumably underserved), the two work their assignment investigating a new designer drug while exploring new interests and friends. Jenko rapidly bonds with a quarterback, Zook (Wyatt Russell), a dumb blond cut from the same cutup cloth as As expected, the focus remains fixed on Schmidt and Jenko, who take turns doing the AdvertisementIt’s no surprise then that Mr. Hill can approximate a cannonball convincingly, yet he also gets mileage out of stillness, as when he drains his face of emotion and widens his eyes, a bit of business that shows how Schmidt is, with total guile, trying to feign guilelessness. At rest, Mr. Tatum, with his half-mast eyes and a neck as big as a redwood trunk, can bring to mind Perhaps as befits their increased celebrity, Mr. Tatum and Mr. Hill spend considerable time apart in the story, which siphons some comedy from the idea that Schmidt and Jenko’s bromance may be going through a rough patch. While Jenko frolics with Zook, Schmidt plays the spurned partner, a setup that allows the movie simultaneously to mock and exploit the conventions of both the traditional romantic comedy and the bromance. As in the first movie, the guiding comic principle here remains the appearance of ironic detachment followed by an assertion of sincerity that’s as appealing as it is disingenuous. It’s a destabilizing strategy that allows the filmmakers to have their cake and scarf it too, as when Jenko rails against a homophobic slur that’s already been deployed.AdvertisementMuch like the jokes about “22 Jump Street” being a franchise, this kind of doubling flatters the viewer, who, after being pulled in as a paying customer, is recruited as a comedy co-conspirator. (In this way, the movie, naïvely or not, also mimics the academic idea that fans now enjoy unprecedented control of the production and circulation of popular culture.) You’re in on the joke, which makes the movie something you watch and root for. In the first movie, the Jump Street operation is restarted, because, as Chief Hardy explains, “The guys in charge of this stuff lack creativity and are completely out of ideas.” That may have registered as a dig at the studio powers that be, but as the sequel affirms, it’s really a smiling affirmation that the guys in charge know precisely what they are doing.“22 Jump Street” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Adult high jinks.





A version of this review appears in print on June 13, 2014, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;