Casino Jack
6.2
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTIn the first and best scene of It is a moment that recalls other movies, in particular Robert De Niro’sBut the mood of “Casino Jack” is a bit of a puzzle. Much of the time the jumpy, jaunty soundtrack music seems to be trying to elicit giggles and guffaws, even when what is happening on screen is not especially funny. The story, pulled from an almost impossibly rich historical record of scandal, ambition, double dealing and ideological grandstanding, is frantically busy, and the cast is too. Barry Pepper, as Abramoff’s business partner, Michael Scanlon, works his jaw and his brows with worrying ferocity, providing an antic counterpoint to Mr. Spacey’s ruthless, strutting cool.Men in suits (and the occasional woman, notably Rachelle Lefevre as Scanlon’s fiancée, Emily Miller) bustle through the corridors of power, hunker down in private jets and leap from dark sedans, wielding cellphones, legal documents and other weapons in the Beltway arsenal. For variety there are also a few actual guns and a handful of gangsters, hookers and Indian chiefs sprinkled in among the politicos and influence peddlers.AdvertisementThe AdvertisementOne of the great, appalling episodes of recent times, Mr. Abramoff’s journey from the College Republicans to the federal penitentiary (he was released this year) has already been the subject of a documentary, While Mr. Gibney’s outraged, prosecutorial film takes a systematic, muckraking approach, viewing Abramoff’s misdeeds as symptomatic of a culture of Republican corruption, Mr. Hickenlooper’s oddly apolitical caper film loses itself in the puzzle of its protagonist’s personality. In Mr. Spacey’s wily, aggressive performance Abramoff comes across as self-aggrandizing to the point of delusion, a man for whom commitment to the conservative cause, vanity and simple greed become harder and harder to tell apart.An observant Jew and faithful family man (Kelly Preston plays his wife, Pam), Abramoff is also a bully and a huckster, bilking Indian tribes out of millions of dollars and trying to muscle his way into the offshore gambling business, all the while flaunting his connections to important Republicans and his growing celebrity in Washington. He is a case study in nutty hubris, tumbling toward ruin and tarnishing the reputations of his colleagues and fellow travelers along the way.Many of these characters are well known and dutifully impersonated by actors who never quite manage to match the full, florid individuality of the real-life models. Tom DeLay (Spencer Garrett) seems more anxious and more unctuous than the man known on Capitol Hill as the Hammer. Karl Rove and Ralph Reed make appearances, as do Bob Ney, then a Republican member of the House from Ohio, and Grover Norquist of Americans for Tax Reform, but they don’t make much of an impression.Far more vivid — and perhaps more securely within the filmmaker’s and the audience’s comfort zone — are Jon Lovitz as Adam Kidan, a sleazy Virginia mattress salesman recruited by Abramoff as a frontman in a crooked casino deal and, for a few deliciously unsavory scenes, Maury Chaykin as an elephantine mobster called Big Tony.The plot has so many moving parts — so many envelopes of money, dropped names, half-explained schemes and hasty flights — that it quickly becomes more frustrating than illuminating. A steadier narrative hand and a clearer satirical eye might have made the intrigue more intriguing and the humor more pointed. As it is, Abramoff is treated as a wild anomaly, a not-quite lovable, not-quite detestable rogue, while the system that spawned him and in which he thrived is spared serious (or anything more than mildly mocking) scrutiny.“Casino Jack” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Obscene language, obscene corruption and a little skin, too.CASINO JACKOpens on Friday in New York and Los Angeles. Directed by AdvertisementWITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on December 17, 2010, on Page C20 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;