Transformers: Dark of the Moon
6.3
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTThere are filmmakers whose work is characterized by thrift, efficiency and devotion to the subtleties of cinematic expression. And then there is I apologize if this sounds like faint praise, but let me provide some perspective. The second of Mr. Bay’s But this is not about me: it’s about the war between Autobots and Decepticons, rival tribes of extraterrestrial fighting machines — literally! — capable of assuming the shape of motor vehicles. Though a computer-enhanced actor briefly appears playing President Obama, no Transformer is on hand to thank him for rescuing the auto industry.Speaking of which: in the series’s latest bit of tongue-in-cheek revisionist history, it is disclosed that John F. Kennedy fast-tracked the moon landing not to beat the Soviet Union in the space race, but rather to secure a site where a giant Autobot vessel had crash-landed after a big war on Cybertron. (“AdvertisementPlot summary is unnecessary: the script, by Ehren Kruger (who joined the franchise with “Advertisement“Drop the bridge!” someone will say, referring to one of the drawbridges that span the Chicago River. A few seconds later you will see the bridge dropping and, just in case you are uncertain of what is going on (maybe you were texting your friend, who sneaked into “So you don’t have to pay terribly close attention if you want to grasp the basic political and military issues. The Autobots like freedom, the Decepticons do not, and mankind — or at least American mankind, which also likes freedom, as well as the cars and guns that symbolize it — is on the side of the Autobots. But there are traitors, both human and metallic, which makes things complicated in the sense that more exposition is required, and plot twists need to be handled with screaming instances of narrative torque.But that’s all fine. Really, it is, because Mr. Bay’s lax notions of coherence and plausibility — I’m sorry, I mean his utterly nonexistent notions of coherence and plausibility — are accompanied by a visual imagination that is at once crazily audacious and ruthlessly skillful. Live-action 3-D has been, at least since ““Dark of the Moon” is one of the few recent 3-D movies that justify the upcharge. Mr. Bay clearly enjoys playing with the format, which is also to say that he takes it seriously. A lot of glass and metal comes flying at your head, and you feel surrounded, plunged into a universe governed by new and strange laws of physics. Nothing you see makes any sense at all, but the sensations are undeniable, and kind of fun in their vertiginous, supercaffeinated way.All the kinetic, explosive fun in the world — which is a rough reckoning of how much Mr. Bay has tried to fit into “Dark of the Moon” — would become tedious if there were not also some other sources of enjoyment on hand. Luckily there are, in the non-anodized, unshiny forms of Frances McDormand, John Turturro, John Malkovich and Ken Jeong. They help make the movie, from time to time, actually funny. It’s not Noël Coward, and it’s not “Mr. Turturro and Ms. McDormand (who plays a snappish government big shot, as you will know within her first five seconds of screen time) may be the only parts of the movie you want more of. But “more” is Mr. Bay’s watchword, and so you will get a whole lot of everything else. An Autobot with the voice of Leonard Nimoy. And a girl, on hand to be rescued, fought over and filmed from behind at a low angle as further testimony to the aesthetic power of 3-D. The previous girl, Megan Fox, was “Transformers: Dark of the Moon” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Much of Chicago is wiped out. And where did those toys learn all those bad words?TRANSFORMERS: DARK OF THE MOONOpens on Wednesday nationwide. Directed by AdvertisementWITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on June 29, 2011, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;