X-Men: Days of Future Past
8.0
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTThe Times critic A.O. Scott reviews “X-Men: Days of Future Past.”Even compared with other self-serious superhero franchises — the brooding “Dark Knight” saga, the agonized “Amazing Spider-Man,” the hectic “X-Men: Days of Future Past,”The only hope is to send someone back in time to prevent the things from being invented, a journey that only Wolverine (Hugh Jackman) is strong enough to undertake. Assisted by Kitty Pryde (Ellen Page), he zips into the past and wakes up in a strange bed with a pretty companion beside him and A scene from the film.Wolverine’s task is, in effect, to get the band back together, which means rousing proto-Professor X, Charles Xavier (James McAvoy), from a drug-addicted malaise; springing proto-Magneto, Erik Lehnsherr (Michael Fassbender), from lockdown (he’s been blamed for the Kennedy assassination); and tracking down the elusive, shape-shifting, bright blue and super-angry Mystique (Jennifer Lawrence), also known as Raven. Crucial assistance is provided by the Beast (Nicholas Hoult) and a speedy teenager (Evan Peters) who will eventually become Quicksilver and who anchors a showstopping action sequence in the kitchen of the Pentagon.AdvertisementNot every moment is quite so inspired as that one, an intricate, freeze-frame slapstick ballet that fuses the pop playfulness of the old comics with the latest digital gimmickry. Far less effective, for example, is a climactic bit in which the enraged Erik, having donned a helmet that pays incidental homage to AdvertisementAnd that, of course, is the big risk in a movie like this. So much has already been done, so much is supposedly demanded by fans, that any given installment in a multisequel enterprise can feel like the hysterical pursuit of diminishing returns. In the case of “Days of Future Past,” the plot is as overelaborate and muddled as some of the effects. The clever historical revisionism of The logic of the story — a time-travel pretzel that strains after the brain-teasing power of an old But, as usual, the characters — and the performers playing them — step unto the breach to provide just enough wit and feeling to make “Days of Future Past” something other than a waste of a reasonable person’s time. The film has found an excellent villain in the person of Peter Dinklage, playing a mutant-hating arms manufacturer with the excellent name of Bolivar Trask.But the psychology of anti-mutant prejudice has never really been Mr. Singer’s main concern. The anger of the mutants remains the most interesting part of his “X-Men: Days of Future Past” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). High-impact, mostly bloodless violence and a few glimpses of mutant buttocks.





A version of this review appears in print on May 23, 2014, on Page C6 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;