Due Date
6.6
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISEarly in Of course the boy  (Jakob Ulrich) is acting, and it’s all meant to be in good, nasty fun. The director The (faked) child abuse theme is something of a continuation of the baby-in-jeopardy stunt that Mr. Phillips pulled off, if barely, inThe sucker-punched boy in “Due Date,” by contrast, is the son of a hippie-ish space case (AdvertisementIn the logic of Mr. Phillips’s universe, punching a child is one more ha-ha, outrageous, liberating act that men (at least on screen) experience in the wilds before returning to the little ladies tapping their feet back home. In “Due Date” the missus (AdvertisementRegurgitation and a self-pleasuring dog define the limits of the new film’s ambitions. Most road movies have a sense of the life rushing past that the guys in “Due Date” scarcely notice, though they do stop to stock up on product placements. This narrow field of vision is mirrored in the main relationship, with Peter, an architect with a sleek wife and house, forced to suffer Ethan’s ignorance and lower-class affectations. Ethan is a rube with a perm and delusions of acting grandeur, as well as a  fount of mayhem, but as a surrogate child he has lessons to teach the expectant father. Equal parts appealing and appalling innocence, with a spark of anarchic menace, Mr. Galifianakis is good enough to make you almost forget the movie.Mr. Downey either can’t, or doesn’t, do much with Peter, who, as written by Mr. Phillips and three others, remains an off-putting, hollow man — a presumably unintentional lack of character development that represents the movie’s sole honest moment. Peter suffers a litany of abuse during his travels with Ethan, receiving the kind of physical punishment — he’s shot with a rubber bullet and survives a crash — that some movies bestow on characters in order to tenderize them for the soft finish. He’s roughed up in a test run for what lies ahead. Yet he’s as obnoxious at the end as at the start. For Mr. Phillips, a hero’s journey doesn’t mean betterment for all; it’s about giggling into the wind while riding shotgun in a world of trouble.“Due Date” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Vehicular violence, casual cussing, dope dealing and a snapping snake.DUE DATEOpens on Friday  nationwide. Directed by WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on November 5, 2010, on Page C10 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;