Captain America: The Winter Soldier
7.8
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe Times critic Manhola Dargis reviews “Captain America: The Winter Soldier.”It’s a bird, it’s a plane — oh, wait, it’s Captain America.The costume looks different, of course, as does the looker (It’s fun until it goes kablooey, when the directors, the brothers Anthony and Joe Russo, are first warming up this sequel and scratching their initials next to the Marvel logo. The ticklish, loose opener finds Steve Rogers (Mr. Evans), Captain America’s Everyman alter ego, running laps around the Lincoln Memorial As with every new chapter in such series, introductions must be made in “The Winter Soldier” so that nonenthusiasts can meet the team members and grasp their place in this cosmos. Here, these include Bucky Barnes (a good Sebastian Stan), Natasha Romanoff a.k.a. Black Widow (The Russos have directed a few other movies, including AdvertisementGiven how little creative wiggle room there is in properties like “The Winter Soldier,” it’s a minor triumph that the Russos imprint any personality on the movie, which is less a stand-alone work than a part of an ever-expanding multimedia enterprise. The directors make their presence felt largely in the first half when they’re emphasizing Steve’s humanity, whether he’s in costume or not. That’s partly the point of his introductory race around the reflecting pool: He runs like the wind, but he also makes you laugh. This emphasis on the human also spills over into some exciting, smartly staged and shot action sequences, including choreographed fights in which the entire bodies of the performers remain visible in the frame and aren’t dissected by the camera and editing.“The Winter Soldier” becomes progressively less enjoyable once the plot thickens and a menace looms, as Fury moves one chess piece, while Pierce moves another. Captain America doesn’t move much, beyond cars and debris. However appealing, Mr. Evans remains a recessive screen presence, and while it may be a relief that Captain America isn’t angst-ridden, he’s blandly well adjusted for a guy who, in his last movie, emerged from a decades-long deep freeze. Comic-book movie directors have to sell the prepackaged goods while trying to capture — and maybe redefine, as Christopher Nolan did with Batman — a superhero’s essence. And they have to do so without boring everyone who could not care less why a crusader went dark as night or that he died only to be reborn. But what if he’s kind of dull?AdvertisementHeresy! Yet one of the problems with Captain America, who was introduced in 1941, is that he didn’t cross over into the mainstream until three years ago with “Despite Mr. Evans’s stated “Captain America: The Winter Soldier” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Comic-book movie mayhem.





A version of this review appears in print on April 4, 2014, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;