Pride and Prejudice and Zombies
5.8
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISAs it turns out, fighting zombies does nothing to improve on the original Elizabeth Bennet, The Times critic Manohla Dargis reviews “Pride and Prejudice and Zombies.”The movie is adapted from the 2009 novel by Seth Grahame-Smith, who hit commercial pay dirt with a catchy title and the fusion of two ludicrously opposed, nominally irreconcilable cultural touchstones: Austen and zombies. With tongue in cheek and a copy of Austen’s novel of manners apparently by his side, Mr. Grahame-Smith added a zombie apocalypse to the Bennet family concerns, peppering the chatter about balls, romantic prospects and the uncertain future of its five unmarried daughters with asides about human brains scooped out like “pumpkin seeds from a jack o’ lantern.” Mr. Darcy is as proud and disagreeable as ever, but like Elizabeth, he’s also a warrior.In Austen’s novel, the mutually hostile Elizabeth and Darcy are already combatants of a kind whose primary weapons are their witty, wounding, deeply meaningful words. In the movie, Elizabeth and Darcy (A scene from the film.The writer-director Burr Steers came prepared for battle, if not much else, with appealing actors — Charles Dance, Jack Huston and an amusing Lena Headey — as well as handsome drawing rooms and impressive estates. But as one zombie brain after another is pulverized, and as Elizabeth and her crew slip through another close call, the story’s lone joke and its grinding literalness grow dull. It doesn’t help that Mr. Steers, as his occasional leering peeks up Elizabeth’s skirts underscore, clings to some old-fashioned ideas about women and their on-screen uses. The larger problem, though, is that each moment spent on this movie is another spent away from Austen’s novel.“Pride and Prejudice and Zombies” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Zombie society. Running time: 





A version of this review appears in print on February 5, 2016, on Page C4 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;