Snow White and the Huntsman
6.1
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTI’m not sure this counts as a spoiler of anything other than Universal’s sleek and seductive And that feels right. There is something exciting about how seriously “Snow White and the Huntsman” takes its themes. Most of the fairy tales that have become fixtures of modern popular culture — including those, like “Snow White and the Huntsman,” directed by the first-timer Rupert Sanders from a script by Evan Daugherty, John Lee Hancock and Hossein Amini, tries something new. Or maybe something old, even atavistic. Though it is an ambitious — at times mesmerizing — application of the latest cinematic technology, the movie tries to recapture some of the menace of the stories that used to be told to scare children rather than console them. Its mythic-medieval landscapes are heavily shadowed and austere, and its flights of magic are summoned from a zone of barely suppressed rage and dangerous power.Most of the power and nearly all of the rage belong to Ravenna, Ms. Theron’s golden-haired, furious queen. Having murdered the king on their wedding night and imprisoned his daughter in a tower, Ravenna preens in front of her liquid-metal mirror, plucks the hearts out of birds (with metal fingernail extensions apparently designed for that purpose) and terrorizes her subjects. She is loyally attended by her creepy brother, Finn (Sam Spruell) — a kind of Dorian Gray portrait of his flawless sister, the ugliness of whose soul seems inscribed on his leering, pitted face — but otherwise alone in the castle of her cruelty.AdvertisementThe evil stepmothers of the past have been monsters of self-generating female narcissism, but Ravenna seems to be a woman with a legitimate grudge against a male-dominated world of sexual violence and patriarchal entitlement. With a slight shift of emphasis, “Snow White and the Huntsman” might have been her story, the tale of a victim turned righteous avenger. And it may be that being denied this status fuels Ravenna’s resentment. Her wrath is directed principally at other women: at the girls whose youth and beauty she steals to feed the spell that keeps her from aging, and at the blameless princess who threatens her simply by being young and alive.AdvertisementThat would be Snow White, of course, played by The “prince” is William (Sam Claflin), a childhood friend of Snow’s and the son of a nobleman who has remained loyal to the memory of her father. He is a gifted archer and a dashing enough young man, but there really is no contest. The movie is not called “Snow White and William.” The Huntsman, a hard-drinking, belligerent widower with no other name, has the advantage of being played by Chris Hemsworth — The New York Times film critics discuss “Snow White and the Huntsman,” “Pink Ribbons, Inc.,” and “A Cat in Paris.”After an overwrought beginning — during which drops of blood fall to the snow with a crash, and James Newton Howard’s score roars and howls like Wagner with a stubbed toe — the movie comes down to earth and springs to life when Mr. Hemsworth shows up. His huntsman, like the dwarfs, is a gruff human presence in a world that might otherwise have been too airily and abstractly fantastical.In turn, the roughness of those characters, along with the scratchy earth tones of Greig Fraser’s cinematography, make possible episodes of enchantment that feel fresh even to eyes that have seen everything under the digital sun. A terrifying slog through the dark forest, a serene sojourn in the garden of the fairies, a visit to an encampment of women and children — each of these scenes casts its own specific and effective spell.In this carefully imagined reality — the production designer, Dominic Watkins, has done exceptional work — Ms. Theron is, if not the fairest, then surely the most striking one of all. She has a remarkable ability to mix coldness and sorrow, and as the special effects etch lines on her face and then smooth them away, she at once invites and refuses sympathy. Ravenna, taught as a girl that beauty was the source of power, has made herself into a perfect aesthetic object and destroyed herself in the process. Snow White, rather than try to beat her in the contest of appearances, must create a new game, based on a different meaning of “fairness” and on her own modest, real-girl appeal.Ms. Stewart, stumbling through the forest and racing through an awkward, Shakespeare-lite speech to her hastily mustered good-guy army, understands the job perfectly and undertakes it in good faith. Her Snow White is part of an interesting new breed of warrior princesses — Katniss Everdeen is their current leader — whose ascendance reflects the convergence of commercial calculations and cultural longings. Long may they reign.“Snow White and the Huntsman” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Blood, monsters and whispers of sexual implication.





A version of this review appears in print on June 1, 2012, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;