The Book of Eli
6.9
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISA road warrior of a different sort, the title character played by This is the first movie  directed by the talented twins Allen and The graphic simplicity of this scene works not only because it’s visually striking, but also because it’s a part of a meaningful piece  in a story  in which everything, nature and civilization included, has been stripped away. Much like the land and narrative  he travels through, Eli has been similarly reduced. A loner, he doesn’t speak much, even to himself. During the first few minutes of the movie, which opens in some barren woods with either falling snow or ash, he remains silently fixed on his task: bagging a pitifully thin cat. His  first  companion is  a mouse (he offers it some roast cat),   a creature that proves friendlier company than most of the isolated people he encounters, the majority of whom, as in Shooting in high-definition digital (with the Red camera) and working with the cinematographer Don Burgess (a frequent shooter for Robert Zemeckis), with New Mexico standing in for America, the Hugheses have created a plausible post-apocalyptic world, one that draws from the western (Hollywood, Sergio Leone) and the tradition of science-fiction dystopia. As George Miller proved in his brilliant AdvertisementAfter hunting the cat, a little human mayhem and a lot of atmospheric preambles, Eli wanders into a deadwood town and the story kicks into gear, for better if sometimes for disappointing worse. The happiest development is the introduction of Gary Oldman as Carnegie, the leader of the outpost. Fortified by his thugs, including some bulging muscle called Redridge (Ray Stevenson, from the HBO show “Rome”), Carnegie keeps the peace, doling out the scarce supplies to the ragtag inhabitants. Among the few faces that stand out from the squinting, scurrying horde are a Mr. Fixit  (an amusing Tom Waits); Carnegie’s lover, Claudia (a sympathetic Jennifer Beals); and her daughter, Solara (the miscast Mila Kunis), who despite the deprivations, appears to have swung by a  Beverly Hills salon for an eyebrow wax.AdvertisementMr. Oldman gives the movie, which at its most serious veers into lugubriousness, a nice jolt and a flinty presence that Mr. Washington can spark against. But the story  that the two play out, beat by beat, cliché by cliché, rarely rises to their talents. Written by Gary Whitta, with some rewriting by  Anthony Peckham, the story  takes a wrong turn once Solara enters the picture, first as bait for Eli (he doesn’t bite) and then as his unwanted traveling companion. Ms. Kunis can work on the big screen, as she proved in Ms. Kunis isn’t to blame. As Jessica Rabbit says, with knowing wit, in “The Book of Eli” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). The usual dystopian violence. The Book of EliOpens on Friday nationwide.Directed by Allen Hughes and Albert
Hughes; written by Gary Whitta; director
of photography, Don Burgess; edited
by Cindy Mollo; music by Atticus Ross;
production designer, Gae Buckley; produced
by Joel Silver, Denzel Washington,
Broderick Johnson, Andrew A. Kosove
and David Valdes; released by Warner
Brothers Pictures. Running time: 1 hour
58 minutes.WITH: Denzel Washington (Eli), Gary
Oldman (Carnegie), Mila Kunis (Solara),
Ray Stevenson (Redridge), Jennifer
Beals (Claudia), Tom Waits (Engineer),
Frances de la Tour (Martha) and Michael
Gambon (George).





A version of this review appears in print on January 15, 2010, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;