X-Men: The Last Stand
6.8
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISCANNES, France, May 25 — Hollywood has always had a presence at the Cannes Film Festival, though in the old days the movies were pretty good. The big studios are generally out of the high-quality movie business these days (that's why specialty divisions were invented), but as long as they remain in the star business, there will always be room for them at Cannes.Halle Berry, Hugh Jackman and Ian McKellen, all of whom star in the generically serviceable Manufactured from almost the finest materials available (more on that later), "The Last Stand" is the third and presumably last film about the powerful Marvel Comics mutants who walk and often fight among us, some on our behalf, some not. The first films in the series — Once again Ms. Berry plays Storm, a weather woman who conjures meteorological mischief by raising her arms, while Mr. Jackman returns as Wolverine, a guy with an enviable immune system and a trigger temper. These good mutants, along with Xavier (Patrick Stewart), the headmaster at a mutant school whose graduates include Rogue (Anna Paquin) and Cyclops (James Marsden), battle against the bad mutants led by Magneto (Sir Ian).Magneto's minions include Mystique (Rebecca Romijn), dipped in deep blue and very mean, along with a human flamethrower named Pyro (Aaron Stanford). New to the cast are Kelsey Grammer as Dr. Henry McCoy, a beastly gentleman covered in blue fuzz, and Ben Foster as Warren Worthington III,  born with a silver spoon in his mouth and wings on his back.AdvertisementAs might be expected, "The Last Stand" pretty much looks and plays like the first films, though perhaps with more noise and babe action and a little less glum.  The story this time partly turns on a new cure for the mutant gene, which pushes the series' gay metaphor without developing it in any interesting way.After the cure is announced, there are mutant protests, government missteps and mutant self-affirmations. Magneto pulls one way, Xavier another, as news of the discovery stirs up fear and panic among the, er, mutant community. By the time Warren Worthington III soars over the Golden Gate Bridge, his white wings extended and evoking seraphic visions of The cure, however, is just another excuse for the mutants to mix it up, which they do in both impressive and tedious fashion. The special effects look expensive, certainly, though if you've seen Storm gather dark clouds once, you've seen her do it a thousand times, no matter Ms. Berry's attempts to make it seem like a third film was a smart idea. Mostly, as so often with these types of empty entertainments, you are left to wonder why companies that hire so many fine actors to run around under latex and foam and have the best technological wizardry money can buy seem to spend so little attention to the screenplay. The credited writers here are Simon Kinberg and Zak Penn, who, like the director, are simply not mutant enough to fly."X-Men: The Last Stand" is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Several central characters die; a few are pulverized.X-Men: The Last StandOpens today nationwide.Directed by Brett Ratner; written by Simon Kinberg and Zak Penn; director of photography, Dante Spinotti; edited by Mark Helfrich, Mark Goldblatt and Julia Wong; music by John Powell; visual effects supervisor, John Bruno; production designer, Edward Verreaux; produced by Lauren Shuler Donner, Ralph Winter and Avi Arad;  released by 20th Century Fox in association with Marvel Entertainment. Running time: 104 minutes.WITH: Hugh Jackman (Logan/Wolverine), Halle Berry (Storm), Patrick Stewart (Professor Charles Xavier), Ian McKellen (Magneto), Famke Janssen (Jean Grey/Phoenix), Anna Paquin (Rogue), Kelsey Grammer (Dr. Henry McCoy/Beast), James Marsden (Cyclops), Rebecca Romijn (Mystique), Shawn Ashmore (Bobby Drake/Iceman), Aaron Stanford (Pyro), Vinnie Jones (Juggernaut), Ben Foster (Warren Worthington III/Angel), Ellen Page (Kitty Pryde) and Dania Ramirez (Callisto).





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page E10 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;