How to Train Your Dragon 2
7.9
AdvertisementBy STEPHEN HOLDENDean DeBlois narrates a sequence from “How to Train Your Dragon 2.”War and peace. Humans and animals. Contemplation of our bestial versus our spiritual sides. These may be too much heavy baggage to attach to a corporate product like In interviews, the writer and director The cheeky protagonist, Hiccup (voiced by The Times critic Stephen Holden reviews “How to Train Your Dragon 2.”That’s the war and peace part. In the humans and animals part, Hiccup’s message to the residents of the Viking island of Berk, including his warrior father, Stoick the Vast (Gerard Butler), has been thoroughly absorbed. Devoted pet care makes loving pets, and everybody’s happy. If you are kind to your beasties while letting them be themselves (after all, they’re fire-breathing dragons and you’re not), everyone can coexist harmoniously.Temperamentally, Hiccup’s trained dragon, Toothless, is one part horse to two parts dog. Both movies, but especially “Dragon 2,” demonstrate that dragons come in all shapes, sizes and colors, and that not all are friendly. The movie doesn’t go overboard in trying to humanize its dragons, which have dragon-y quirks, like casually setting fires that must be extinguished.Advertisement“Dragon 2” is considerably darker and more self-aware than its forerunner. Both films are speedier than the average animated blockbuster. In places, “Dragon 2” is almost too fast to keep up with, and, in other places, it’s a little too dark, at least in 3-D. The spectacle quotient has been increased exponentially, and you are keenly aware of the divisions between its adagio and allegro passages. Its thundering air-war sequences, with hordes of dragon-riding fighters swarming into battle, have the swooping, gliding kineticism of vintage newsreels of World War II dogfights.The movie begins on a sweet, jolly note, with a dragon-racing derby won by Astrid (America Ferrera), who is now Hiccup’s girlfriend and partner in exploration. Astrid has mellowed from a sarcastic, hypercompetitive tomboy to an adventurous sidekick and is much less compelling. The comic scenes of Hiccup, Astrid and their friends Snotlout (Jonah Hill), Fishlegs (Christopher Mintz-Plasse), Tuffnut (T. J. Miller) and his sister Ruffnut (Kristen Wiig) are among the film’s weakest, but Ms. Wiig’s Ruffnut gets off some caustic remarks.Hiccup would rather go exploring with Astrid and Toothless than spend time being groomed to be clan chief by his father. One day they discover a fort in shards of green ice that reveals an ominous new species of dragon. This giant, lumbering Bewilderbeast, an alpha dragon, may not fly. But this tusked creature ejects streams of water that turn everything to ice, and its immensity is overwhelming.He is the slave of Drago Bludvist (Djimon Hounsou), a scowling, sociopathic warrior whom they encounter through Eret (Kit Harington), a rakish dragon trapper who is helping Drago amass a captive army. This fearsome villain bears a distinct physical resemblance to several real-life warlords of recent history.The narrative coup of The story seems to be going somewhere until it comes to a halt with the inevitable showdown between the forces of darkness and the forces of light. Once the war cry has been sounded, it is off to the battlefield.“How to Train Your Dragon 2” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested) for intense action, mildly scary sequences and mild language.





A version of this review appears in print on June 13, 2014, on Page C7 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;