Shrek Forever After
6.4
Mike Myers voices Shrek in the last installment of the series, “Shrek Forever After.” 
                            The not-so-scary villain in Cast Interviews: 'Shrek Forever After'
A scene from “Shrek Forever After.”                            
                            He is actually Rumpelstiltskin (Walt Dohrn), the Brothers Grimm trickster, with spiky red hair and larcenous eyes rolled up to the sky, his thin lips twisted into a malevolent smirk. As the volatile king of the land of Far Far Away in an alternate universe, he dons a succession of ridiculous wigs: towering white for ceremonial duties, bright red when in a foul mood.        
                            When this Mephistophelean stand-in, who resembles a punkish, pint-size Hannibal Lecter, waves a contract in your face, you&rsquo;d better go over it with a microscope; a magnifying glass would not be strong enough to read the fine print. In &ldquo;Shrek Forever After,&rdquo; he cajoles the titular jolly green ogre into signing a Faustian agreement in which he gives away a day of his childhood in exchange for one without grown-up responsibilities.        
                            The film opens with an explanatory flashback in which the king and queen of Far Far Away, the parents of Shrek&rsquo;s wife, Fiona (
                            No sooner has Shrek (
                            Before the contract is signed, we see the now-domesticated Shrek suffering from is-that-all-there-is? syndrome. Married with three squalling children, he is a grumpy middle-aged man who has lost his edge. Instead of scaring the villagers, he is a popular local celebrity mobbed by fans begging him to autograph pitchforks and to roar for them. Throwing a tantrum at a children&rsquo;s birthday celebration, he mauls the cake.        
                            The plot (Mr. Dohrn not only plays Rumpelstiltskin but also is credited as &ldquo;head of story&rdquo;) is borrowed from 
                            Because this you-don&rsquo;t-know-what-you-have-till-it&rsquo;s-gone allegory is so familiar, &ldquo;Shrek Forever After&rdquo; feels a bit tired at its core. For all its high jinks, it seems directed less at children than at their parents. There is no getting around it: Shrek is now a beleaguered ex-monster with a case of midlife angst.        
                            That said, &ldquo;Shrek Forever After&rdquo; adroitly camouflages its fatigue with the usual blizzard of wisecracks, pop-culture references and sight gags. Foremost among those references is Rumpelstiltskin&rsquo;s captive band of witches &mdash; virtual dead ringers for the Wicked Witch of the West &mdash; who plow the skies in formation on broomsticks and can fizzle into nothing when doused with water. One of Rumpelstiltskin&rsquo;s henchmen is a pied piper who can make people dance till they drop dead.        
                            The soundtrack includes fragments of the Carpenters&rsquo; 
                            Shrek learns that the only way the contract can be undone is if he and Fiona exchange &ldquo;true love&rsquo;s kiss.&rdquo; But when they meet in this alternative world, she is in no mood for kissing, and his attempts to plant one on her are angrily rebuffed. Even a more serious smooch later on doesn&rsquo;t work because true love has yet to blossom.        
                            But almost from the beginning of their association, there is a glint of distant recognition in Fiona&rsquo;s gaze. Along with other &ldquo;Shrek&rdquo; regulars, Puss in Boots (Antonio Banderas) appears, but in the alternative Far Far Away, he is a bloated, pampered house cat who is so fat he can hardly stir.        
                            Because &ldquo;Shrek Forever After,&rdquo; directed by Mike Mitchell (
                            What fortifies &ldquo;Shrek Forever After&rdquo; are its brilliantly realized principal characters, who nearly a decade after the first &ldquo;Shrek&rdquo; film remain as vital and engaging fusions of image, personality and voice as any characters in the history of animation. The self-effacing Shrek, an endearing slob with a Scottish brogue whose idea of heaven is to lie in the backyard and make the muddy equivalent of snow angels, may now be a middle-aged everyman, but he is as endearing as ever.        
                            But it is Mr. Murphy&rsquo;s toothy, shifty-eyed Donkey who distills the series&rsquo; attitude of cheerfully curdled hipness. In his eternal upbeat cheekiness, he is a creation to rival Peter Pan.        



                            Directed by Mike Mitchell; written by Josh Klausner and Darren Lemke; edited by Nick Fletcher; music by Harry Gregson-Williams; produced by Gina Shay and Teresa Cheng; released by DreamWorks Animation SKG and Paramount Pictures. Running time: 1 hour 33 minutes.        
                            WITH THE VOICES OF: Our legacy from the war in Iraq will be written in the lives of the people we have left behind.What did an imprisoned Times columnist have to do with a postwar best seller?Vladimir V. Putin&rsquo;s return to the Kremlin in 2012 diminishes the possibility that Russia will evolve into a stable democracy.