Full Metal Jacket
8.3
LEAD: MORE than any other major American film maker, Stanley Kubrick keeps to his own ways, paying little attention to the fashions of the moment, creating fantastic visions that, in one way and another, are dislocated extensions of the world we know but would prefer not to recognize.
MORE than any other major American film maker, Stanley Kubrick keeps to his own ways, paying little attention to the fashions of the moment, creating fantastic visions that, in one way and another, are dislocated extensions of the world we know but would prefer not to recognize.

The best Kubrick films - ''Lolita,'' ''Dr. Strangelove,'' ''2001,'' ''A Clockwork Orange'' and ''Barry Lyndon'' - are always somewhat off-putting when first seen. They're never what one has expected. No Kubrick film ever immediately evokes the one that preceded it. Yet it's so distinctive that it can't be confused with the work of any other director.

Though the general public couldn't care less, this can be infuriating to anyone who wants to be able to read a film maker's accumulated body of work as if it were a road map leading to some predetermined destination. As movie follows movie, the Kubrick terrain never becomes familiar. You drive at your own risk, confident only that the director has been there before you.

''Full Metal Jacket,'' Mr. Kubrick's harrowing, beautiful and characteristically eccentric new film about Vietnam, is going to puzzle, anger and (I hope) fascinate audiences as much as any film he has made to date. The movie, opening today at the National and other theaters, will inevitably be compared with Oliver Stone's ''Platoon,'' but its narrative is far less neat and cohesive - and far more antagonistic - than Mr. Stone's film.

Like ''The Short Timers,'' Gustav Hasford's spare, manic novel on which it is based, the Kubrick film seems so utterly reasonable that one doesn't initially recognize the lunacies recorded so matter-of-factly. The film is a series of exploding boomerangs. Just when you think you can relax in safety, some crazed image or line or event will swing around to lodge in the brain and scramble the emotions.

''Full Metal Jacket'' is closer in spirit to Francis Coppola's ''Apocalypse Now,'' even if it has none of the mystical romanticism of the Coppola film in either its text or physical production. However, lurking just offscreen, there's always the presence of Mr. Kubrick, a benign, ever mysterious Kurtz, who has come to know that the only thing worse than disorder in the universe is not to recognize it - which is, after all, the first step toward understanding and, possibly, accommodation.

Disorder is virtually the order of ''Full Metal Jacket,'' whose pivotal character, Private Joker (Matthew Modine), the narrator of the novel, wears a peace symbol on his battle fatigues and, on his helmet, the slogan ''Born to Kill.'' Disorder is also there in the structure of the film itself.

''Full Metal Jacket'' is divided into two parts, which at first seem so different in tone, look and method that they could have been made by two different directors working with two different cameramen from two different screenplays. Only the actors are the same. Part of the way in which the movie works, and involves the audience, is in its demand that the audience make the sudden leap to the seemingly (but far from) conventional battle scenes in Vietnam, which conclude the film, from its flashily brilliant first half, set in the Marine Corps boot camp at Parris Island, S.C.

Though Mr. Modine's Private Joker, a humanist in the process of being permanently bent by the war, provides the film with its center, the poetically foul-mouthed Gunnery Sergeant Hartman (Lee Ermey) is the film's effective heart, giving terrifying life to ''Full Metal Jacket'' long after he has left the scene and the film has moved on to Vietnam.

Sergeant Hartman is a Marine ''lifer,'' a machine whose only purpose is to turn the soft, half-formed young men who arrive at Parris Island into killers without conscience. There's no nonsense that he's doing it for the men's own good. Everything is made subordinate to ''the corps,'' to which end the recruits are humiliated, beaten, exhausted, tricked, lied to, subjected to racial slurs and drilled, constantly drilled, physically and psychologically.

They recite by rote creeds, prayers and obscene couplets intended to detach them from all values from the past. On Christmas they sing ''Happy birthday, dear Jesus,'' and laugh at their own impertinence. They sleep with their rifles, to which they've been ordered to give girls' names. The training is a kind of ecstatic, longed-for washing of brain and body, defined by Mr. Kubrick in a succession of vignettes so vulgar and so outrageous that one watches in hilarity that, boomerang-like, suddenly returns as shock and sorrow.

The effect of this part of the film, photographed and played with an unnatural cleanliness that reflects the nature of the training iself, is so devastating that one tends to resist the abrupt cut to Vietnam, where order is disorder and truth is simply a matter of language. At one point Private Joker, who has become a Marine combat correspondent, respectfully notes that henceforth ''search and destroy'' missions are to be described as ''sweep and clear.'' The landscape is lunar. Even the sky is a different color.

Though the first half seems complete in itself, the point of ''Full Metal Jacket'' is made only through the combat mission that ends the film in the ruins of the city of Hue, which, as seen by Mr. Kubrick, is both a specific place and the seat of judgment for all that's gone before. Sergeant Hartman's ghost looks on.

The performances are splendid. Mr. Modine (''Birdy,'' ''Mrs. Soffel,'' ''Streamers'') must now be one of the best, most adaptable young film actors of his generation. The film's stunning surprise is Mr. Ermey, a leathery, ageless, former Marine sergeant in real life. He's so good - so obsessed - that you might think he wrote his own lines, except that much of his dialogue comes directly from Mr. Hasford's book, adapted by the novelist with Mr. Kubrick and Michael Herr (''Dispatches''). Note with admiration Vincent D'Onofrio, who plays a hopelessly overweight Parris Island recruit who turns himself into Sergeant Hartman's most dedicated student.

''Full Metal Jacket'' is not without its failed inspirations. A series of television ''interviews'' with battle-worn marines suggests a different, simpler, more obvious kind of movie. Some jokes intended to appall are just jokes: ''How do you manage to shoot women and children?'' ''Easy. You don't lead them so far.'' It sounds as if it's been said many times before, but that could also be the point.

Not for Mr. Kubrick is location shooting in the Philippines or Thailand. Since the early 1960's, he has lived and worked in England, where he created his own, very particular Vietnam locations for ''Full Metal Jacket.'' They're otherworldly. They don't match expectations, any more than the narrative does. They are, however, utterly true to a film of immense and very rare imagination. 
WAR IS HELL 
FULL METAL JACKET, produced and directed by Stanley Kubrick; screenplay by Mr. Kubrick, Michael Herr and Gustav Hasford, based on the novel ''The Short Timers,'' by Mr. Hasford; edited by Martin Hunter; director of photography, Douglas Milsome; music by Abigail Mead; production designer, Anton Furst; released by Warner Bros. At National, Broadway and 44th Street; Manhattan Twin, 59th Street east of Third Avenue; Eighth Street Playhouse, west of Eighth Street; Cinema Studio, Broadway at 66th Street; 86th Street East, between Second and Third Avenues. Running time: 118 minutes. This film is rated R. 
Private Joker/Matthew Modine 
Animal Mother/Adam Baldwin 
Private Pyle/Vincent D'Onofrio 
Gunnery Sergeant Hartman/Lee Ermey 
Eightball/Dorian Harewood 
Cowboy/Arliss Howard 
Rafterman/Kevyn Major Howard 
Lieutenant Touchdown/Ed O'Ross