The Intern
7.1
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe director Nancy Meyers doesn’t just make movies, she makes the kind of lifestyle fantasies you sink into like eiderdown. Her movies are frothy, playful, homogeneous, routinely maddening and generally pretty irresistible even when they’re not all that good. Her most notable visual signature is the immaculate, luxuriously appointed interiors she’s known to fuss over personally — they inevitably feature throw pillows that look as if they’ve been arranged with a measuring tape. These interiors are fetishized by moviegoers and The Times critic Manohla Dargis reviews “The Intern.”In her latest, Jules’s problem is as familiar as the last headline that recycled the plagues of career women who want it all, apparently can’t have it all and are unsure if they want any of it in the first place. “What do women want,” Forbes The table is a silly, lazy screenwriting contrivance, and it says more about Ms. Meyers’s conflicted ideas about powerful women than it conveys anything interesting about Jules. A successful Hollywood director like Ms. Meyers, for starters, would never have gotten this far and with a number of hits to her name if she had been afraid of telling other people what to do. But Ms. Meyers has some distinct ideas about women, work and power, and so she piles on the issues: Jules is chronically late to meetings, among other sins, although that seems to be because she likes riding slowly through the office on her bicycle. The bike suggests that she’s a nonconformist, although the neat rows of her pretty, young, overwhelmingly white employees doing something in front of their computers suggest otherwise.Ben serves as a kind of Mr. Fix-It, who, with quiet confidence, paternal competence and a driver’s license, helps Jules get on track at work and home in the way that none of the man-children in her life can. Ms. Meyers has clearly been binging on Judd Apatow comedies, and she stacks her movie with assorted bromantic schlumps (including a The hard-working founder and owner of a successful clothing company isn't thrilled when she has to pair up with a retired businessman as part of the company's "senior intern" program, but the young woman soon finds in the old-timer a valuable business resource and a very good friend.Ben doesn’t sweep up the damsel like Daniel Day-Lewis in “The Last of the Mohicans,” but he proves more than up to the task. Ms. Meyers’s script makes sure that’s the case, as does the smartest choice she makes in “The Intern”: Mr. De Niro, her loosest, most valuable player. Long celebrated for his vein-popping intensity, Mr. De Niro has been yukking it up in comedy since the 1960s. Part of what distinguishes his later laugh-ins is that they’re inextricably haunted by the ghost of Travis Bickle and sometimes — as when Mr. De Niro breaks out his terrifying ear-to-ear Soupy Sales grin — Rupert Pupkin, his nut job from “The King of Comedy.” However straight his character, he can’t help but be a destabilizing force, which is crucial when a movie is as hermetically sealed as “The Intern.”Ms. Hathaway, who’s regularly forced to take Jules’s inner girl out for a sniffle and a sob, does her best, but it’s hopeless. Jules is less of a character and more of a fast-walking, speed-talking collection of gender grievances, some of which originate with a squirmy house husband Matt (Anders Holm). One look at that guy’s smile and you want Mr. De Niro to wipe it off. He doesn’t, but there’s no need to because Mr. De Niro owns the movie from the moment he opens his mouth, and is staring into the camera and right at you. (“The Intern” is rated PG-13. (Parents strongly cautioned.) Tumescence and the usual tee-hee-hee gaggery. 





A version of this review appears in print on September 25, 2015, on Page C9 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;