American Reunion
6.7
Advertisement A.&#160;O. SCOTTBelieve it or not, there are teenagers in this great country who respond to intrinsically hilarious phrases like “band camp,” Beyond that, this latest installment in the Anyway. The high school buddies who defined, at the turn of the century, what it was to be “American” have grown older. (The original filmmakers, the screenwriter Adam Herz and the director Paul Weitz, have moved on, bequeathing the franchise to the “Harold &amp; Kumar” auteurs, As their 13th reunion approaches, the five main male characters have settled into various versions of adulthood, except for Stifler (If some of the parenthetical names in that paragraph make you nostalgic — or make you a little curious about what all those once-fresh young stars have been up to lately — here are some more. Back home in East Great Falls, Mich., for the big event, Kevin runs into his old flame Vicky (More faces from the old crew show up briefly (I won’t spoil any late-breaking cameos), and Mr. Levy once again steals the show with overexplicit (but unimpeachably sensible) parental advice. There’s a little new blood — or rather, new flesh — in the person of Ali Cobrin, playing Kara, a high school senior who throws herself at Jim, her former baby sitter. Her lust makes Jim uncomfortable, but her willingness to take off her clothes allows “American Reunion” to earn its R rating and to uphold the dreary tradition of aggressive leering followed by anxious, moralistic slut-shaming.AdvertisementThe sexual attitudes in this series have always been all over the map, a stew of lechery, revulsion, longing and sheer childish terror — and that’s just the guys. Female sexuality remains a source of confusion. Much as the boys slobber and gawk, nothing scares them more than a woman who actually seems to want to go to bed with one of them.The “American Pie” series does, to its credit, allow some exceptions to this rule — Michelle’s happy, unapologetic lust in particular — and its nastiness has always been softened by Jim’s neurotic sweetness. In this movie an obnoxious youngster derisively calls him “Adam Sandler,” and the joke underscores an important contrast. Mr. Sandler characteristically turns his insecurity into aggression; he’s a bully pretending to be an underdog. But Mr. Biggs has always been willing to risk embarrassment, and to display vulnerability, ambivalence and decency, as well as his backside and his privates.Like many real-world gatherings of former high school classmates, “American Reunion” is sometimes awkward and uncomfortable, caught between nostalgia for the old days and relief that they are gone forever. It has some good moments, but it goes on too long, and not enough happens that is likely to create new memories. Remember “American Pie”? If you do, this movie is redundant and sad. If you don’t, it’s irrelevant.“American Reunion” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Stifler’s Mom. Band camp. Eugene Levy.





A version of this review appears in print on April 6, 2012, on Page C9 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;