Four Rooms
6.7
Since it's not possible to hide a brand-new movie under a rock, Miramax did the next best thing with "Four Rooms," trying to give it a review-proof opening  on Christmas Day. That amounts to an act of mercy, since the less said about this career-denting fiasco, the better. Preview audiences don't often look as seasick as the crowd filing out of Thursday night's screening. 

     Why? Well, "Four Rooms" is a long-awaited omnibus film with segments directed by four talented young film makers who were free to indulge their wildest notions about what might go on in hotel rooms on New Year's Eve. Indulge they did. They piled on time-killing chat, strained attempts at kinkiness and enough  celebrity cameos to give "Four Rooms" the illusion of star power. The cast does  include some good actors. But you wouldn't want to see any of these people in a  traffic accident, and you won't want to see them here. 
The heaviest acting burden falls -- hard -- on Tim Roth, who plays a bellhop named Ted in a spirit of ill-advised homage to Jerry Lewis. Frenetic and broad even by Lewis standards, Mr. Roth's Ted is victimized by hotel guests in each of the four short films. The first, "The Missing Ingredient," finds him playing straight man to a coven of witches led by Madonna in a black rubber mermaid dress. The witches take over the Honeymoon Suite to perform rites dopey enough to give witchcraft an extra-bad name. 

     The director is Allison Anders, who showed a keen understanding of female characters in her first-rate "Gas Food Lodging" but who treats the women in this film like idiots. The coven -- Valeria Golino, Lili Taylor, Ione Skye and Sammi  Davis -- gather with Madonna around an improvised caldron and dance half-naked,  looking ridiculous. They are trying to summon the spirit of a blond witch (Amanda de Cadenet) who vanished many years ago while wearing black lingerie and spanking another blonde. Something like that. 

     Anyway, the witches have everything they need except a semen specimen, which  is where Ted figures in this equation. Ms. Skye, who was so much better in "Gas  Food Lodging," lands the job of procuring the specimen. Ted desperately overacts being flustered. 

     Since "The Missing Ingredient" is so bad and runs first, it can be presumed to be the weakest entry here. But the next film, Alexandre Rockwell's "Wrong Man," is actually worse. This time, a man with a gun (David Proval) menaces a woman (Jennifer Beals, Mr. Rockwell's wife) whom he has gagged and tied to a chair. When she gets the gag off, insults and accusations of infidelity fly. 

     Into this domestic spat comes Ted, who is eventually kissed by the man and regaled by the wife with a long, mocking list of synonyms for the word penis. When Ted tries to climb out a window, a man (Lawrence Bender, the film's producer) leans out the window and throws up on him. 

     The next film, "The Misbehavers" by Robert Rodriguez, is the best thing here  for several reasons: because it has a sustained comic conceit, because it has Antonio Banderas delivering droll self-parody, and because the rest of "Four Rooms" looks downright unreleasable. In this segment, Mr. Banderas parodies hotblooded machismo as he plays a family man who decides to romance his wife (Tamlyn Tomita) while their two children stay alone in a hotel room. Ted is handed a big tip and told to baby-sit. 

     The film spins some pitch-black comedy out of this situation and is helped by a confident performance by Lana McKissack as the older child. She calls Ted to report a steady stream of complaints. Among other things, her kid brother (Danny Verduzco) is smoking, drinking champagne, playing with a gun and watching a steamy dancer on cable television (Salma Hayek, Mr. Rodriguez's current muse, plays this tiny role).  Ted is not helpful, but he is terrified of Mr. Banderas's character, who is sooner or later bound to come home.  Mr. Banderas sends off this segment with the right punch line. 

     Finally, along comes "The Man From Hollywood," Quentin Tarantino's first film directing since "Pulp Fiction." It finds Mr. Tarantino doing something not many  other directors would try right now: casting himself in a lead acting role. (He'll also soon appear in Mr. Rodriguez's "From Dusk Till Dawn.") Ensconced in  a penthouse with an odd bunch of cronies -- Bruce Willis, Ms. Beals and Paul Calderon -- Mr. Tarantino plays a guy who has been made jaded and frivolous by overnight success as a film maker. Coming from him, this is no laughing matter.  

     Ted is recruited to settle a bet taken from an old "Twilight Zone" episode. If Mr. Calderon wins, he gets a car; if he loses, somebody will chop off his finger. Can the group tip Ted enough to make him do the hatchet job? Most of the film is about settling this nasty business. Along the way, Mr. Tarantino throws  in details that lamely recall "Pulp Fiction" without a trace of its cleverness.  There are empty discussions of beverages, brand names and pop culture. A phone call to a different location finds Marisa Tomei stoned and dazed before a video  game, picking up where Eric Stoltz, the drug dealer in "Pulp Fiction," left off. Andrzej Sekula's cinematography gives this segment a harsher, more glaring look  than some of the film's darker-looking episodes, which are set in hotel rooms painted the color of dried blood. 

     The camera lingers on some slapstick from Ted as the final credits roll. Last week's preview audience refused to stay for this and set a speed record racing for the exit doors. 

     "Four Rooms" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It includes much profanity, partial nudity, a corpse, sexual references and the prospect of playful amputation. FOUR ROOMS "The Missing Ingredient": written and directed by Allison Anders; director of photography, Rodrigo Garcia; edited by Margie Goodspeed. "The Wrong Man": written and directed by Alexandre Rockwell; director of photography, Phil Parmet; edited by Elena Maganini. "The Misbehavers": written, directed and edited by Robert Rodriguez; director of photography, Guillermo Navarro. "The Man From Hollywood": written and directed by Quentin Tarantino; director of photography, Andrzej Sekula. For all segments: production designer, Gary Frutkoff; music by Combustible Edison; produced by Lawrence Bender; released by  Miramax. Running time: 96 minutes. This film is rated R. 

  WITH: Tim Roth (Ted the Bellhop); "The Missing Ingredient": Sammi Davis (Jezebel), Amanda de Cadenet (Diana), Valeria Golino (Athena), Madonna (Elspeth), Ione Skye (Eva), Lili Taylor (Raven) and Alicia Witt (Kiva). "The Wrong Man": Jennifer Beals (Angela) and David Proval (Sigfried). "The Misbehavers": Antonio Banderas (Man), Lana McKissack (Sarah), Patricia Vonne Rodriguez (Corpse), Tamlyn Tomita (Wife), Danny Verduzco (Juancho) and Salma Hayek (TV Dancing Girl). "The Man From Hollywood": Jennifer Beals (Angela), Paul Calderon (Norman), Quentin Tarantino (Chester).