Knowing
6.2
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTNobody requires plausibility from a movie like Or maybe even if it doesn’t: the folks at a recent sneak preview of “Knowing,” directed by It’s safe to say that the crowd was laughing at Mr. Cage, rather than with him, since Mr. Cage rarely expresses mirth on screen. Instead, he favors a demented, compulsive intensity, which can sometimes be kind of fun, for example in the And why not? What would you do if you were an M.I.T. astrophysicist who discovered that the numbers written down 50 years earlier by a spooky schoolgirl and sealed in a time capsule were prophecies of subsequent catastrophes? You might also hit a tree with a Louisville Slugger and start ranting like a madman. But the odd thing about Mr. Cage in this movie is that even when he is responding to the threat of complete human extinction, you still can’t help feeling that he’s overreacting.His character, John Koestler, is, like most movie dads these days, a widower, stricken with grief and trying to raise a cute, precocious young son (Chandler Canterbury). Once John starts running the numbers from the spooky girl’s spreadsheet, the tone of the movie switches from foreboding creepiness to apocalyptic hysteria, summed up less in the occasional explosion or transportation-related fireball than in Rose Byrne’s incessant shrieking. She plays Diana, daughter of the spooky schoolgirl (and mother of another one; both are played by Lara Robinson), and evolves from mysterious stranger to potential love interest to raving hysteric in record time.AdvertisementThough not quickly enough. The draggy, lurching two hours of “Knowing” will make you long for the end of the world, even as you worry that there will not be time for all your questions to be answered. Who are those slender blond folk, called “the Whisper People” by John’s son and Diana’s daughter? Are they goth vampires who showed up early to audition for the Actually, you will figure out who they are long before the astrophysicist does and stop caring long before that.“Knowing” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Some mild swearing and lots of death.KNOWINGOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page C13 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;