Easy A
7.1
AdvertisementBy STEPHEN HOLDENWhatever else it accomplishes, the sassy high school comedy Ms. Stone’s character, Olive Penderghast, is an indefatigably self-assured, clever, attractive California girl at Ojai High School who narrates her story to a Webcam. A satire directed by “Easy A” isn’t nearly as good a movie as “Clueless,” The trouble begins after Olive’s toxic best friend, Rhiannon (Aly Michalka), questions her about the previous weekend, which she spent alone. Fed up with Rhiannon’s prurient nosiness, Olive says she slept with a college boy. That tidbit becomes viral gossip, lavishly embellished, after Marianne overhears it in the bathroom. Suddenly the whole school is giving the previously invisible Olive hard, inquiring looks. Instead of cringing in shame at her suddenly bad reputation, she defiantly decides to use it for good.AdvertisementIn the movie’s funniest scene, she feigns wild, noisy sex with Brandon (Dan Byrd), a persecuted gay student, at a party at which the guests crowd around the door to listen to their faked S-and-M high jinks. Among the school’s mostly virginal boys, Brandon emerges as a heroic stud. Seeking similar redemption, assorted nerds accost Olive and beg her to give them manly credibility by hearsay. She agrees to help them for a price, without actually sleeping with them.I’m not sure contemporary high school students, who are more sexually experienced than the film’s teenagers, will buy “Easy A,” although its tech-savvy vision of teenage life in the age of texting and Twitter posts is up to the minute. Mean-girl cults and bullies are a lot more menacing in the real world than as portrayed in “Easy A,” in which actual cruelty is mostly a game in which no one gets seriously hurt. Plus, “Easy A” has a perfect prince in waiting for Olive in Woodchuck Todd (Penn Badgley), who was her crush in eighth grade. (The subplots in “Easy A” throw in some awkward curves. Olive’s parents, Dill (AdvertisementThe one discordant note that can’t be laughed off is the soured marriage of Olive’s English teacher (Thomas Haden Church) and the school guidance counselor (“Easy A” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has strong language and a prurient attitude.EASY AOpens on Friday  nationwide. Directed by WITH: Penn Badgley (Woodchuck Todd), Amanda Bynes (Marianne Bryant), Dan Byrd (Brandon), Thomas Haden Church (Mr. Griffith), 





A version of this review appears in print on September 17, 2010, on Page C6 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;