The Prestige
8.5
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTStuffed with hard-working actors, sleek effects and stagy period details, Set in a stylized late-Victorian world of dueling music-hall magicians and diabolically clever inventors, it has a satisfyingly puzzlelike structure, zipping around in time and scattering clues throughout its busy scenes and frames. Like The point of a magic trick, after all, is not the content, whatever that might be, but the ingenuity of its conceit and the skill of its execution. And “The Prestige” — the title is a magician’s term of art referring to the climactic surprise that seals a successful trick — manifests an enthusiasm for the nuts and bolts of illusionism that is pretty much irresistible. It is a mock-gothic costume drama with more than a touch of Las Vegas extravagance, a larger-scale, flashier — if ultimately less haunting — relative of “The Prestige” begins with a death and proceeds through a murder trial and its aftermath, using flashbacks within flashbacks to deepen the mystery it promises to solve and changing points of view to misdirect our attention. At the center are two ambitious young magicians, Robert Angier (AdvertisementAngier and Borden perform competing versions of the same tricks in different theaters and show up at each other’s performances in disguise, sometimes to steal secrets, sometimes to sabotage tricks and cause public embarrassment.AdvertisementAngier is the smoother performer, as much an actor as a prestidigitator, and Mr. Jackman, equally at home onstage and on screen, uses his lean, long-legged charisma to good effect. Mr. Bale’s fierce inwardness likewise suits the character of Borden, a working-class striver (Angier is a slumming aristocrat) who is also something of a purist. He disdains Angier’s crowd-pleasing antics in favor of a more stripped-down presentation, challenging his audience rather than charming or seducing it.Mr. Nolan’s sympathies appear to lie mainly with Borden, but as a director, he has sensibilities  more in line with Angier’s. Much as he respects the rigor of close-hand trickery based on tried-and-true techniques, this filmmaker, whose other movies include Mr. Bale’s performance, in particular, is something to savor (especially in retrospect, when you at last understand just what he’s been up to), but the acting in “The Prestige” is, for the most part, subordinate to the plot twists and visual sensations. You don’t really go to a magic show to appreciate the commitment to emotional truth displayed by the lovely assistant as she’s being sawed in half. You go to be amazed that, after all the sawing, her body is still in one piece.Which is as good a time as any to mention the presence of Rebecca Hall plays Borden’s wife, who worries that his commitment to his craft exceeds his devotion to her and their young daughter. The ever-reliable That story is nudged to its wildly curlicued ending — don’t worry, I won’t give it away — by Two inventors can hatch the same idea, just as two magicians can perform the same trick, but only one is likely to be remembered and rewarded, and his victory may depend on cunning, dirty tricks and luck as much as on merit. (A similar contest may now be under way between “The Prestige” and “The Illusionist.”)Edison, of course, is one of the progenitors of motion pictures, and to cast him as an off-screen heavy is a nice bit of wit. Tesla, meanwhile, who works in an isolated laboratory in the Rocky Mountains, conjures the possibility of innovations that could make the old, mechanical stage magic obsolete, much as digital technology now threatens to supersede the handmade magic of cinema.AdvertisementBut Tesla — who is described as “a wizard” — also introduces an element into the movie that may trouble magic aficionados, whose commitment to techniques of deception is frequently accompanied by a rationalist skepticism toward claims of supernatural power. Serious magicians (like Ricky Jay, who has a cameo here) tend also to be determined debunkers. (Penn &amp; Teller’s Showtime series, the title of which I can’t print here, is part of this tradition, as is Johnny Carson’s famous “Tonight” show humiliation of Uri Geller, who claimed to be able to bend spoons through telekinesis.)But the Nolans, eager to push the boundaries of their jaw-dropping parlor trick, introduce an element of bunk that compromises the coherence of the film’s concept. At least I suspect that Alfred Borden might think so, which makes me wonder if the filmmakers might not agree. Their slyest move may be to divide “The Prestige,” already caught between two protagonists, against itself. Maybe, in the end, it all makes sense. Or maybe convincing you that it does is just the last and cleverest of this movie’s many sleights of hand.“The Prestige” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has some violent scenes and a scary, menacing atmosphere.THE PRESTIGEOpens today nationwide. Directed by WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page E12 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;