Live Free or Die Hard
7.2
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe gasping, grunting and oozing hard-body slab that muscles, and sometimes crawls, through A lot has happened in the 12 years since Life or age or something has mellowed Mr. Willis. He no longer enters a movie like God's gift, as he did almost two decades ago in the first "Die Hard," lips pursed as if he alone were in on the joke — which, given the fat salary he was earning, perhaps he was. In "Live Free or Die Hard" he enters swinging, fist smashing through hard glass and sinking into soft flesh. He's making a point and so is the movie, namely that McClane (and Mr. Willis) is ready to earn our love again by performing the same lovably violent, meathead tricks as before. And look, he's not laughing, not exactly, even if the film ends up a goof.An unexpectedly funny goof, at that, despite everything, including the mayhem and somewhat creepy plot. The screenplay attributed to Mark Bomback, who shares the story credit with David Marconi, has the whiff of multiple writers, as action-driven productions generally do. It originated with a 1997 story (dubiously titled AdvertisementIn most Hollywood action movies, references to Sept. 11 as well as to the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan are often tacked on or displaced, used for decorative flag-waving or scenes of torture. "Live Free or Die Hard" tries to engage the real world more directly than most studio-made fantasies, with  a logic-defying plot involving a disgruntled government security expert. That would be  Thomas Gabriel, who seems partly inspired by the counterterrorism expert Richard A. Clarke and partly informed by Bill Gates and is wholly played by the pretty  Timothy Olyphant, dressed in black and wearing  Maggie Q on his arm. Mr. Olyphant has many charms, but annihilating menace is not one of them. Mr. Willis nonetheless keeps any incredulity in check along with his sneer.AdvertisementDespite its jaw-jutting title, with its evocation of revolutionary America and radical individualism, "Live Free or Die Hard" keeps a tighter rein on McClane, dialing down his man-against-the-world attitude to a low hum. He's still more or less alone, at least existentially, though, as per the action playbook, he quickly picks up a sidekick and audience surrogate in the hacker impersonated  by Justin Long (flicking between annoyance and amusement).But McClane is also unequivocally playing for team America, helping the F.B.I. and its no-nonsense, supremely capable deputy director,  Bowman (Cliff Curtis), who runs  the sillily named cyber division with blinking monitors and scurrying minions. Heroic in deed and in acquaintance, Bowman knows to side with McClane, saving his contemptuous looks for the guy from Homeland Security.Nothing on Len Wiseman's résumé — he previously  directed the two "Live Free or Die Hard" is rated PG-13. (Parents strongly cautioned.) Extremely brutal violence and mild obscenities.LIVE FREE OR DIE HARDOpens today nationwide.Directed by Len Wiseman; written by Mark
Bomback, based on a story by Mr. Bomback
and David Marconi; director of photography,
Simon Duggan; edited by Nicolas de Toth;
music by Marco Beltrami; production designer,
Patrick Tatopoulos; stunt coordinator,
Brad Martin; produced by Michael Fottrell;
released by 20th Century Fox. Running time:
130 minutes.WITH: Bruce Willis (John McClane), Timothy
Olyphant (Thomas Gabriel), Justin Long
(Matt Farrell), Cliff Curtis (Bowman), Maggie
Q (Mai) and Mary Elizabeth Winstead
(Lucy McClane).





Because of a transmission error, a film review yesterday about &#8220;Live Free or Die Hard&#8221; misstated the critic&#8217;s description of the plot. It should have been described as &#8220;logic-defying,&#8221; not &#8220;logic-defined.&#8221;A version of this review appears in print on , on Page E1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;