Alice Through the Looking Glass
6.3
AdvertisementBy STEPHEN HOLDENThe best and maybe the only way to appreciate A symbol of that excess is a table set for a two-person tea party whose piles of goodies contain enough sugary calories to fell an entire Navy battalion from diabetic shock. Were it not for sweets, there would hardly be a story. Like Mr. Burton, whose original film made over $1 billion at the global box office, One of the major plot threads concerns the conflict between the evil Red Queen, Iracebeth (a feisty, snapping What does all this have to do with The Times critic Glenn Kenny reviews “Alice Through the Looking Glass.”Alice has her own problems. After her seafaring adventures establishing trade routes to China on her ship, the Wonder, she returns to England to find that a rejected suitor, Hamish (Leo Bill), has maneuvered the sale of her precious ship by persuading Alice’s mother (Lindsay Duncan) to agree to a dubious deal. The liberated, adventurous Alice will from now on be trapped in stuffy Victorian England.AdvertisementThe discontinuity between the movie and its source material means that classic Carroll inventions like Tweedledee and Tweedledum (Matt Lucas), the Cheshire Cat (Stephen Fry), the Dormouse (Barbara Windsor) and the White Rabbit (Michael Sheen) are trotted out as members of Alice’s posse, but except for some signature visual quirks and well-cast voices, they are less characters than decorative nostalgic touchstones. Carroll’s deeply subversive, nonsensical embrace of the absurd and truly strange has been mostly painted over.AdvertisementLeading the list of stars returning from Mr. Burton’s 2010 film is His search for his parents, presumed dead at the end of the first film, ignites the third subplot in which his best friend, Alice, equipped with a whirly gyroscopic time machine called a Chronosphere, tries to alter the past to change the future.Alice’s temporal gyrations between present and past as she dives in and out of the liquid mirror give “Through the Looking Glass” a jarring whiz-bang momentum that intensifies and accelerates as the movie hurtles along. A preview of the film.To procure the Chronosphere, Alice must steal the device from Time himself (Sacha Baron Cohen), a cranky half-human control freak with a ticking timepiece for a heart and an Austrian accent, living in a castle that suggests a giant clock.As uninspired and warmed over as you may find the narrative strands of the movie — with a screenplay by Linda Woolverton, who also wrote “Alice in Wonderland” — its unpredictable, rampaging sense of time lends it a manic energy in keeping with Carroll’s vision of nonsensical disorder. Whirring clocks accelerate and reverse time and sometimes become stuck, conveying a demented zaniness. These are the only scenes in which the adjective “wondrous” truly applies.Most of the other special effects belong to a chilly post-“Star Wars” aesthetic. Yes, they are spectacular enough to keep your eyes glued to the screen, even when attention wanders from the clichéd subplots. But the cumulative effect is a nonstop ride on a 21st-century roller coaster.In the end, to paraphrase the Beatles, everyone is desperate to get back to where they once belonged. And in the Disney tradition, needless to say, everyone arrives home safe and sound.“Alice Through the Looking Glass” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested) for perilous sequences. Running time: 





A version of this review appears in print on May 27, 2016, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;