Step Up 2 The Streets
6.2
AdvertisementBy MATT ZOLLER SEITZ“Step Up 2 the Streets” is an earnest sequel to the 2006 cornball musical drama Like its predecessor, this follow-up takes place in a gritty neighborhood, has a white lead, posits a universe where racial and class differences are minor obstacles to fun and pretends its clichés aren’t clichés.The heroine of this one is Andie (Briana Evigan), an orphaned girl and a member of the 410, a notorious crew that stages musical pranks in public places and competes in dance contests at a club called the Streets. Andie auditions for admission to the school and gets in on the good word of its star dancer, the handsome, blond Chase (Robert Hoffman), who saw her dance at the club. Andie’s commitment to her new school gets her kicked out of her old crew, but no matter. She forms a new crew with Chase, who fantasizes about winning the grand prize in a contest at the Streets.When Andie and Chase, both of whom are white, hold forth on the values of the Streets and barge into the club demanding that its mostly nonwhite patrons give them respect and a shot at the title, the movie is writing socially aware checks that its trite, fake-inspirational story can’t cash. This willfully clueless attitude about race and class — factors examined in the recent, vastly superior AdvertisementBut there are saving graces, notably exuberant musical sequences (the best of which depicts couples salsa-dancing at a backyard barbecue) and a likable supporting cast, including Adam G. Sevani as Moose, a diminutive, goofy but preternaturally confident dancer who might be the baddest nerd in movie history.“Step Up 2 the Streets” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It includes profanity and one violent scene. STEP UP 2 THE STREETSOpens on Thursday nationwide. Directed by Jon M. Chu; written by Toni Ann Johnson and Karen Barna, based on characters created by Duane Adler; director of photography, Max Malkin; edited by Andrew Marcus and Nicholas Erasmus; music by Aaron Zigman; production designer, Devorah Herbert; choreography by Jamal Sims, Nadine   (Hi Hat) Ruffin and Dave Scott; produced by Patrick Wachsberger, Erik Feig, Adam Shankman and Jennifer Gibgot; released by Touchstone Pictures. Running time: 1 hour 38 minutes.WITH: Briana Evigan (Andie), Robert Hoffman (Chase), Adam G. Sevani (Moose), Cassie Ventura (Sophie), Danielle Polanco (Missy) and Christopher Scott (Hair).





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page E10 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;