Suicide Squad
6.5
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTScholarsThis is not to say that it’s a completely terrible movie — it is certainly not worse than A secret government agency recruits villains from prison allowing them their freedom if they join dangerous missions.The superhero genre is at present “Suicide Squad” presents a motley collection of characters, drawn from the DC comic-book series of the same name and played by an assortment of emerging and established actors. Superman is, for the moment, out of the picture. Batman, in his current Ben Affleck incarnation, shows up now and then to provide brand continuity. His nemesis the Joker is a more frequent and annoying presence, played as a preening, pimpish sociopath by Jared Leto. Joker’s girlfriend, AdvertisementA series of tactical skirmishes with faceless minions — semi-zombies that can be slaughtered en masse, without a second thought — leads to a big final showdown. Spoiler alert: It’s essentially the final showdown from “Ghostbusters” and at least a half-dozen other recent blockbusters, with a few differences of what I guess we should call nuance. You can safely duck out of the theater and spend a good 20 minutes on the claw machine or Instagram, slipping back in to catch the final song and the sequel-teasing extra scene during the end credits.
                A suicide squad, a samurai, hot dogs and a young Barack Obama come to the big screen this month.            That’s the thing about genre: It’s a mold into which a variety of ingredients can be poured, some more flavorful than others. It may be pointless to hold the main plot of “Suicide Squad” against it. What fun there is can be found elsewhere, in the costumes and the banter and the exploration of metahuman psychology. Or at least in the dead-serious, delightfully mischievous performances of AdvertisementMr. Smith plays Deadshot, a gifted marksman who is part of the posse of inmates conscripted on behalf of the United States government by Amanda Waller (Ms. Davis) to deal with extraordinary threats to national security. The others include Harley, Killer Croc (Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje), Diablo (Jay Hernandez) and the scene-stealing Boomerang (Jai Courtney). The best sequences are their capsule biographies, which free Mr. Ayer from the slog of action and allow brief bursts of wit, energy and color. Deadshot’s back story is not in itself all that interesting — he’s the devoted father of an adorable little girl and also a ruthless hit man for hire — but no one in movies is better than Mr. Smith at playing a man of sorrows and wisecracks (even if his performance here is a minor variation on his work in the brilliant and underrated As for Ms. Davis, Deadshot puts it best: “That is one mean lady.” Is it possible to be radiantly unsmiling? Ecstatically grim? Ravishingly businesslike? If the next five DC comic-book movies consisted entirely of Amanda Waller filling out paperwork, answering emails and videoconferencing, I would be forced to rethink my skepticism.Get recommendations on the best TV shows and films to stream and watch.Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box.Invalid email address. Please re-enter.You must select a newsletter to subscribe to.View all New York Times newsletters.That won’t happen, of course, so I’m left to wish that Mr. Ayer had done more with the moral ambiguities of the source material. There is a lot of promise in the idea of miscreants’ joining together in a good cause — I’m old enough to remember the original “A Team,” which was awesome — and inherent drama in the prospect of prickly individualists’ uniting. But potentially engaging stories, like the doomed love between Rick Flag (Harley Quinn, meanwhile, in a tiny T-shirt and tinier shorts, her multicolored hair in ponytails, is a frat boy’s idea of what a feminist action heroine might look like. Her relationship with the Joker — she calls him her Puddin’, and is basically his brainwashed plaything — is a sour sexual nightmare played as a smirky, naughty joke. Harley is the object of a tired, lowest-common-denominator male fantasy, much as Ms. Robbie herself was in a recent Some viewers may take offense at the way Harley is depicted. Others may shrug it off. The target audience is likely to be at least mildly titillated. But her character is the strongest proof that this movie, for all its rebellious posturing, is nothing but business as usual.“Suicide Squad” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It’s too cynical, or too scared, to be as grisly or as dirty as it should be. Running time: 





A version of this review appears in print on August 5, 2016, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;