Just Go With It
6.4
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTI should start by confessing that I spent a lot of time before the screening of “Just Go With It” — and a few stretches while it was actually going on — trying to remember what the darn thing was called. I may have to look up the title a few more times before this review is done, and the movie is likely to live on in my memory (to the extent that it will) as “that one with “Just Go With It” remakes, updates, spices up and tones down a 1969 film called Still, this movie is better than Which means Danny must divorce his nonexistent wife, whom his new sweetheart insists on meeting. He recruits his longtime assistant and receptionist, Katherine (Ms. Aniston), and treats her to a Beverly Hills shopping makeover that allows this mousy single mom to reveal that she had been a fox all along. The aftermath also allows Ms. Aniston to display her sometimes-dormant (like in that Aaron Eckhart thing) comic talents, which are as sharp and sleek as her shoes and outfits. Katherine’s first meeting with Palmer — in which Ms. Aniston, or rather her character, impersonates a boozy, cynical Los Angeles dowager — is also one of a handful of lively and successful comic set pieces that keep the movie from lapsing into by-the-numbers hack work. (This is as good a time as any to mention that the director is AdvertisementNick SwardsonAdvertisementKatherine’s initial, reluctant imposture is complicated when Palmer discovers that she has a daughter (Bailee Madison) and a son (Griffin Gluck), whose father Danny must then pretend to be. Mr. Sandler, who built a career on childishness, often seems more comfortable horsing around with kids (or other maturity-resistant grown men) than getting all lovey-dovey with adult women. And in his scenes with these children he shows both pushy, rude playfulness and generosity, helping the young performers rise above generic movie-brat cuteness and earn some laughs on their own.All in all, the hit-to-miss ratio of “Just Go With It” is not so terrible. Which is not to say the movie is anything special. The sexual politics of “Cactus Flower” are interestingly awkward, looking anxiously back to the ’50s and flinching at the onset of feminism, but this version occasionally lets loose an unacknowledged snarl of regression and resentment. None of the women have professional ambitions or money of their own; their primary asset is “hotness.” Ms. Aniston proudly shows herself off in a bikini — and looks great, it must be said — while Mr. Sandler keeps his shirt on, hanging loosely over his baggy pants. Yes, I know, the double standard is nothing new, but a wittier, less insecure movie might have at least had some fun with it.But Mr. Sandler is not really willing to risk making fun of himself. He is too much of a bully for that. The infantile hostility that has always been part of his schtick seems increasingly tired, and “Just Go With It” is flecked with mean, lazy gags. There is some cheap homophobia at the end, and a lot of the kind of misogyny that treats the existence of nonthin, nonrich, nonwhite women as a joke in itself.On the other hand there is the very thin, very rich and extremely pale character played by Nicole Kidman, who pops up, once the action has moved to Hawaii, to serve as a foil for Ms. Aniston and to remind viewers of her own comic talents. She seems to be having a pretty good time, as do most of the other performers, as if the movie were following the advice of its genial, forgettable title.“Just Go With It” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It is frequently risqué, but always safe. JUST GO WITH ITOpens on Friday  nationwide. Directed by WITH: Adam Sandler (Danny), 





A version of this review appears in print on February 11, 2011, on Page C8 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;