Green Room
7.1
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTIn the opening scene of “Green Room,” the members of the Ain’t Rights, a punk band from the East Coast, wake up in a cornfield somewhere in the Pacific Northwest. The driver fell asleep at the wheel, the van is out of gas, and the hassles escalate after that. A promised gig falls through, a podcast interview becomes a little awkward, and the group’s corporate assets, not counting the van and the gear inside it, add up to around $25 and a few takeout containers of rice and beans.Things will only get worse. There will be guns, machetes, dogs trained to gobble human flesh, and a forest full of scary homegrown fascists. But before all of that — before “Green Room,” written and directed by The Ain’ts are hardly innocent: Their touring vehicle runs on fuel siphoned from parked cars. But there is something touching about their devotion to one another and to the dogmas and rhythms of punk rock. It has been around for much longer than any of them. Though “Green Room” takes place in the smartphone-enabled present and assembles a cast of talented millennials, it explores a venerable subcultural terrain.Booked to play a show at a remote roadhouse whose patrons are skinheads — the place is decorated with SS lightning bolts and Confederate flags — our heroes unleash a cover of the Jeremy Saulnier narrates a sequence from his film.The ideological errors of young music fans aren’t really the point of “Green Room.” The political resurgence of white supremacy gives the movie a frisson of topicality, but extremism is less a theme than a conceit. Mr. Saulnier, whose previous color-coded exercise in mayhem was AdvertisementThat inspired bit of casting is almost enough to inscribe “Green Room” alongside Once it becomes clear that the band can’t talk its way out of trouble, its members decide to fight back, with their bassist, Pat (Mr. Yelchin), and their guitarist, Sam (Ms. Shawkat), taking the lead, and a couple of less-than-fully-loyal skinheads (Mark Webber and Imogen Poots) playing backup. Once the violence starts, “Green Room” settles into horror movie logic, becoming steadily more gruesome and less terrifying as the body count grows. You know some people are going to die, and figuring out who and in what order feels more like a brainteaser than like a matter of deep moral or emotional concern.Which is cool and everything. Mr. Saulnier certainly could have done more, but he succeeds perfectly well within the limited terms he has set for himself. When the situation looks especially desperate, Pat offers a lesson drawn from a long-ago paintball match, the point of which is that the only way to defeat grimly determined professional warriors is with a defiantly playful, anarchic spirit. That’s a canonical punk-rock attitude, of course, even if it isn’t quite an adequate response to hate-based politics. Darcy likes to tell his young followers that “it’s not a party; it’s a movement.” But there’s no reason to take him seriously.“Green Room” is rated R (under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). “Punk ain’t no religious cult. Punk means thinking for yourself.” Running time: 





A version of this review appears in print on April 15, 2016, on Page C11 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;