The Number 23
6.4
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGIS“The Number 23”A master crafter of overwrought pulp fiction, Mr. Schumacher started in Hollywood as a costume designer before writing several black-oriented movies, including Michael Schultz’s memorable ensemble comedy No matter how preposterous, Mr. Schumacher’s films almost always have a certain pop je ne sais quoi; they’re hooky like a chart-topping song, like that not-quite-dumb-enough television show you just can’t stop watching. “The Number 23,” which was written by the newcomer Fernley Phillips, starts off promisingly with Mr.  Carrey, eyeballing a dog from behind the wheel of a truck. The character, the curiously named Walter Sparrow, works as a dogcatcher in Anywhere U.S.A., a job that might be a tip of the hat to Mr. Carrey’s breakout role in The story doesn’t make a doggy lick of sense, which isn’t a knock. Walter’s wife, Agatha (Virginia Madsen), buys him a used book, “The Number 23,” written by someone waggishly called Topsy Kretts. If that name doesn’t tip you off that something is afoot (say the two words fast if you’re still missing the joke), then Walter’s sudden preoccupation with the book should do the trick. Before you can say “obsessive-compulsive disorder” or look up apophenia (the experience of seeing connections where none exist), Walter finds himself seeing the number 23 in every combination everywhere he turns: indoors and out, on street signs and in his personal history, name and anniversaries. It all adds up, even if it doesn’t.AdvertisementWhat does it mean? Not much, though the film spends a lot of our time and its energy trying to persuade us otherwise. Mr. Schumacher has some fun with special effects, taking us inside the gloomy neo-noir world of the book itself, where Mr. Carrey plays another character with an animal-related moniker, Fingerling. The word Fingerling means small fish, but he comes across as small potatoes. A detective by trade, he plays the sax, fools around with a femme fatale named Fabrizia (Ms. Madsen, slinking around in dark hair and black slip), and hooks up with a woman he anoints the Suicide Blonde (Lynn Collins). Naturally he employs a wrung-out voice-over, suggesting that he or the screenwriter has lapped up one too many detective stories.AdvertisementSpeaking of pattern recognition: Mr. Phillips has admitted to reading Robert Anton Wilson, who, along with Robert J. Shea, wrote the cult favorite “The Illuminatus! Trilogy,” a series of three novels that fold conspiracy theories in with a detective pastiche and science fiction, and helped popularize the notion that the number 23 is somehow meaningful, an idea that may have originated with the cosmic joke qua pseudoreligion Discordianism. (The name Walter Sparrow evokes one of Mr. Wilson’s characters, Hugh Crane.) The popularity of the books with some readers can be gauged by the Web sites dedicated to the number 23 (“The 23 Enigma Explained!!”),  one of which (Despite the fast-flying digits, the numbers finally feel irrelevant to the film’s riffs on crime and punishment. The Fingerling story evidently entertains Mr. Schumacher, who darkens the already somber palette to accentuate the shadows and play up the nominal mystery, but his heavy hand soon helps push the material into lugubrious self-parody. This might be fine — certainly it produces welcome laughs, especially toward the finale — if Mr. Carrey appeared to be in on the joke. Alas, this great comic talent seems to think he’s fronting a serious film, an assignment for which he has reined in his body, trading his ductile physicality and natural grace for moody stares and anguished postures that, in all likelihood, will soon be mirrored by even his more adamant fans in the audience.“The Number 23” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has adult language, scenes of animal endangerment, and one realistic-looking slit and spurting human throat. THE NUMBER 23Opens today nationwide. Directed by WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page E8 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;