The Sorcerer's Apprentice
6.1
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTT“The Sorcerer’s Apprentice”Meanwhile, though, Dave has learned that he is the Prime Merlinian, which means that “The Sorcerer’s Apprentice” is not just another dweeb/cutie romantic comedy, but also a phantasmagorical action picture in which bolts of lightning will shoot out of people’s hands, and ancient spells will be uttered to cataclysmic effect right on the streets of Manhattan. To spare you the full rehash: hundreds of years ago a bunch of bad wizards were stuffed into a Russian doll, including the really mean Morgana (Alice Krige) and the gorgeous Veronica (The good news, if you are not a Monica Bellucci completist, is that the rival sorcerers are played by But while Mr. Molina and Mr. Cage supply a measure of well-compensated eccentricity, their labors ultimately serve to emphasize the grinding mediocrity of the enterprise. The method of “The Sorcerer’s Apprentice” is to string together pedestrian moments of explanation, comedy and emotion around noisy and derivative action sequences, some of which seem to go against the very premise of the movie. Why would Balthazar and Maxim — magicians who can fly, change shape and conjure force fields, fireballs and just about anything else they want — need to climb into cars and chase each other through the streets of New York?I put that question to a colleague, who condescendingly replied, “because it’s a Jerry Bruckheimer movie.” Duh. But still. It’s stupid. At several points Balthazar intones that the fate of mankind hangs in the balance. But it never feels as if more were at stake than the bottom line of Jerry Bruckheimer Films and the Walt Disney Company, who seem to have confected this lumbering amusement in the hopes of picking up a little It should be noted, though, that “The Sorcerer’s Apprentice” does have a distinguished cultural pedigree, reaching back to Advertisement“The Sorcerer’s Apprentice” is rated PG





The Sorcerer’s Apprentice: 
Opens on Wednesday nationwide.
Directed by Jon Turteltaub; written by
Doug Miro, Carlo Bernard and Matt Lopez,
based on a story by Mr. Lopez, Lawrence
Konner and Mark Rosenthal; director
of photography, Bojan Bazelli; edited
by William Goldenberg; music by Trevor
Rabin; production designer, Naomi Shohan;
costumes by Michael Kaplan; produced
by Jerry Bruckheimer; released by
Walt Disney Pictures and Jerry Bruckheimer
Films. Running time: 1 hour 52
minutes.
WITH: Nicolas Cage (Balthazar Blake),
Jay Baruchel (Dave Stutler), Alfred Molina
(Maxim Horvath), Teresa Palmer
(Becky Barnes), Monica Bellucci (Veronica),
Toby Kebbell (Drake Stone), Alice
Krige (Morgana), Jake Cherry (Young
Dave), Omar Benson Miller (Bennet) and
Gregory Woo (Sun Lok).A version of this review appears in print on July 14, 2010, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;