The Age of Adaline
7.2
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe Times critic Manohla Dargis reviews “The Age of Adaline.”Movie people have been lapping at the fountain of youth since cinema’s creation, both on-screen and off. That’s no surprise given that cinema confers a kind of immortality on performers even if, as parades of tragically frozen faces attest, it can get confusing for the real people on camera. In Billy Wilder’s “Sunset Boulevard,” Norma Desmond so deeply embodies this confusion that she punctuates a banal observation with a pitiful question: “Stars are ageless — aren’t they?” Norma may be a Hollywood tragedy, but the movie brilliantly proves that she’s got the ageless part right.In “The Age of Adaline,” A scene from the film.What comes around goes around — gods, people, intimations of immortality. Adaline, alas, isn’t resurrected with any special talents (not aging is more burden than gift for her, and certainly not an aptitude); the problem with this movie is that she isn’t resurrected with much of a personality, either.Best known for the television show “The filmmakers try to insist that time weighs heavily on Adaline, but there’s little in J. Mills Goodloe and Salvador Paskowitz’s script that suggests that the years have left her with much more than an expansive wardrobe and a knack for both languages and Trivial Pursuit. Far too often here, Adaline’s parade of period dresses, coats and handbags stand in for the richness of human experience. The director Best of all, though, is the underused Ms. Burstyn, who makes her every scene pop. Flemming is brought in after a newsreel-style recap of Adaline’s life in one of the movie’s smartest, most effective and meaningful interludes. Adaline, for reasons that never really make sense, is on the verge of moving out of San Francisco, something she does every 10 years. The two women meet at a restaurant where, facing off in a booth, they rapidly assume their respective roles after Adaline maternally chides Flemming for using too much salt on her food. It’s a familiar routine, and lovely. All at once, Ms. Burstyn, with just a few bobs of her head, a whine creeping into her voice and not an iota of digital help, transforms into a petulant adolescent. It’s the most magical scene in the movie.Advertisement“The Age of Adaline” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). There’s a sad visit to a vet.





A version of this review appears in print on April 24, 2015, on Page C13 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;