The Ugly Truth
6.5
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThat tap-tap-tapping sound you hear is another nail being driven into the coffin of the romantic comedy. Over the years this sturdy if supple genre has survived extraordinary cultural and social changes, most notably the suffragist movement in the early part of the last century and women’s rights toward the latter. Liberated women, along with the pill, quickie divorces, swinging couples, blended families and various wars both abroad and at home might have dinged the genre, but it has endured and adapted, even when the story now hinges on boy meets boy meets boy (as in When it comes to the old straight-boy-meets-straight-girl configuration with big-studio production values, however, you might as well forget it, at least if you’re a woman. Outside of Judd Apatow, who has carved out a niche and inspired something of a subgenre with movies about funny, smutty but sincere man-boys puzzling their way through adult heterosexual relations, the romantic comedy is nearly as dead as Meg Ryan’s career. In the best of these films, the women aren’t romantic foils, much less equals: they’re either (nice) sluts or (nicer) wives, and essentially as mysterious and unknowable as the dark side of the moon. In the most calculating (Which leads to The two leads, bathed in an otherworldly golden light that makes their skin look honey-roasted and turns their teeth into beacons, look tasty indeed, almost finger-lickin’ good. Ms. Heigl doesn’t do perky all that persuasively, but she does keep her smile and relative dignity even in scenes in which Abby is forced to play the fool, which is often, as when she’s hanging upside down from a tree in her skivvies. She even survives the scene that finds Abby writhing spasmodically during a dinner with her corporate masters, because, well, she’s wearing those pulsating panties, the boy at the next table has the remote, and there’s nothing funnier (or, really, scarier) than the spectacle of female pleasure. Well, it worked in “When Harry Met Sally.”AdvertisementThe director, Robert Luketic,  who did far better with AdvertisementThat three women thought up this junk should be no more surprising than the fact that the movie is being released by Columbia Pictures, which is overseen by Amy Pascal, the co-chairwoman of Sony Pictures Entertainment. One of the lessons of “The Ugly Truth” — beyond the obvious one that a desirable, desiring woman can never, ever, be happily single and sexual in modern Hollywood — is that holding to your hard-won ideals is of no consequence, at least when there’s a guy to be hooked. When Mike is brought in, Abby fights him because she sees him for what he is: the lowest common denominator. Eventually, though, she succumbs to his coarse ways, even adopting his crude language, because, well, that’s what the public wants.Isn’t that right, Ms. Pascal?“The Ugly Truth” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). The language is consistently crude and includes the apparently now requisite antigay slurs. THE UGLY TRUTHOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by Robert Luketic; written by Nicole Eastman, Karen McCullah Lutz and Kirsten Smith, based on a story by Ms. Eastman; director of photography, Russell Carpenter; edited by Lisa Zeno Churgin; music by Aaron Zigman; production designer, Missy Stewart; produced by Steven Reuther, Kimberly di Bonaventura, Deborah Jelin Newmyer, Tom Rosenberg and Gary Lucchesi; released by Lakeshore Entertainment and Columbia Pictures. Running time: 1 hour 35 minutes.WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page C13 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;