End of Watch
7.7
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISAn ode to beat cops and the expansive literature on them, The villains in “End of Watch” are less flamboyantly diverse (and quaint sounding) than those rattling around “The New Centurions.” Here the baddies are primarily Latino gangbangers (and their cartel masters), men and women with neck tattoos, dead eyes and names as blunt as their violence: Demon, Wicked, Big Evil.Their ethnicity partly reflects changes to the neighborhood that the cops patrol, identified in the movie as South Central, but since 2003 officially known as As with “Training Day” this movie pivots on a fundamentally decent cop, Brian, who endures a crucible of violence and experiences something of a moral education. A former Marine (Mr. Ayer was in the Mr. Ayer has said he wanted “End of Watch” to look like something on YouTube; happily, it just looks and plays like a mainstream multi-act movie with a lot of super-shaky, run-and-gun imagery. After a while Mr. Ayer’s visual gimmickry calms down or simply ceases to distract as the episodic story takes Brian and Mike from the city’s mean streets to their homes and women, Janet (AdvertisementThere are also a pair of tough-chick cops (America Ferrera and Cody Horn), and their rabidly violent gangbanging counterpart (Yahira Garcia). Mostly, though, this is about men loving each other and fighting the evil that other men do.Some of that wickedness is grimly familiar from the news and other films, and almost all of it is committed by the black and mainly brown people on the other side of the blue line. Mr. Peña’s sympathetic performance and likable character help keep the movie from coming across as a kind of freakout over the specter of a Latino Nation.At the same time Mr. Ayer exhibits a curious nostalgia for the hood’s good old bad and blacker days, notably in the use of a Public Enemy song and a scene in which a middle-aged African-American tough (a vivid “End of Watch” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Extreme violence. 





A version of this review appears in print on September 21, 2012, on Page C6 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;