Death Race
6.4
AdvertisementBy NATHAN LEEThere’s something to be said for a movie that knows exactly what it is and then whacks that knowledge home like a rusty pipe in the face. Case in point: The premise, updated from the 1975 cult classic Out on Terminal Island, where the worst of the worst participate in the wildly popular Death Race showdown, an ice-queen warden named Hennessey (Framed for the murder of his wife and shuffled off to Terminal Island, fury mounting and muscles rippling, Jensen is pressed into fending off a grimy assortment of gearhead sociopaths with the promise that if he wins the race he’s free to go. Needless to say, things are about to blow up, quite literally, in everyone’s face.And how they blow! Directed by Paul W. S. Anderson, a low-rent genre artisan who seems to have figured out a thing or two since staging AdvertisementExtended over three increasingly frantic, vividly murderous rounds, the Death Race itself is a tour de force of no-nonsense neo-grindhouse. Anchored by the ever-dependable Mr. Statham and his gruff, buff stoicism, the movie is legitimately greasy, authentically nasty, with a good old-fashioned sense of laying waste to everything in sight — including the shallow philosophizing and computer-generated fakery that have overrun the summer blockbuster.No fancy talk here, just solid, monosyllabic obscenities; no flights of digital fancy, just souped-up monster cars flipping end over end in a napalm blaze and crashing in a crunch of flaming metal ouch.“Death Race” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Mauling, maiming, bruising, beating, impalement, immolation, detonation, decapitation and a flagrant disregard of automotive etiquette. DEATH RACEOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by Paul W. S. Anderson; written by Mr. Anderson, based on the screenplay WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page E13 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;