Big Hero 6
7.9
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe Times critic Manohla Dargis reviews “Big Hero 6.”Have the Walt Disney and Pixar animation studios become Walt Pixar, or maybe Wixar or Dixar? It’s getting hard to tell these once-distinct siblings apart. Disney’s latest animated feature, “That’s certainly a good way to think of Baymax, the big, beautiful, bouncy white robot who toddles, waddles, squeaks and rather more prosaically flies through Directed by Once Hiro has been sprung from jail by his Aunt Cass (Maya Rudolph), the story pieces begin sliding into place. Hiro and his older brother, Tadashi (Daniel Henney), live with Cass above her San Fran-cool bakery and cafe. She’s a disappointingly bland maternal creation, by turns screechy and huggy, and Tadashi isn’t much better, even if he’s a hunky brainiac who studies at an institute of higher nerdiness alongside a A scene from the film.The designs for these characters are gently exaggerated, with innocuous looks to go with their friendly, unthreatening temperaments. They pale next to Baymax, whose pleasing plumpness and symphony of cartoon sounds — when he walks, his legs produce muffled boing-boing noises — make him the embodiment of kawaii and the Japanese culture of cute. Created by Tadashi, the robot is a palpably tactile and charming screen presence who in time becomes Hiro’s supersize Jiminy Cricket, part folk philosopher, part moral compass. What makes Baymax so memorable and emotionally potent is that he’s also something of a Proustian Marshmallow who triggers an irresistible chain of elemental pleasures: He’s a stuffed animal, a warm blanket, a cozy chair, a warm embrace.AdvertisementBoth Baymax and the backgrounds, with their amusing excesses and startling photorealistic detail, make the story seem fairly superfluous, at least until you’ve settled in. Like the portmanteau name San Fransokyo, the movie fuses different source materials, drawing on diverse cultural traditions, urban landscapes, architectural visions and futurist ideas.There are waving good-luck cats, airborne AdvertisementHiro’s journey is rather more pedestrian, resembling that of the classic hero — the writers are Robert L. Baird, Daniel Gerson and Jordan Roberts — retrofitted to the information age with some space-age filler. Hiro is called to adventure only to refuse that call and then, after receiving help from a magical helper, or rather Baymax, crosses the threshold, enters the belly of the beast and so on. More specifically, a tragedy radically upends Hiro’s world, putting the kibosh on his plans to attend the university and plunging him into a very sad place. He emerges almost by accident when he stumbles across a villain, a discovery that sets him and the story down a path that’s so well-trod it feels discouragingly inescapable: that of the genius turned superhero.It’s too bad that in making its first movie based on a Marvel comic Disney didn’t decide to take a real leap into the future, say, by making Hiro a girl or ditching some of the clichés, like the blowout finale, that make so many superhero movies feel so drearily similar. “Big Hero 6” is good enough to transcend its blah ending and to make the case that every superhero story should be entirely animated. Given the amount of computer-generated imagery in live action superhero movies, why not? Only that for its next comic-book adventure Disney should think about hiring “Big Hero 6” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). The movie features a death and several fight sequences.





A version of this review appears in print on November 7, 2014, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;