Remember Me
7.2
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISIn It’s hard to know what  the director Allen Coulter could have done to improve Will Fetters’s absurdly contrived, yakky script about love and loss, largely set in the summer of 2001. But Mr. Coulter doesn’t help matters by infusing the movie with grave self-importance. Everything comes weighted in significance, from the way Tyler furiously smokes his cigarettes to the  camera movements that carefully show off the squalor in which this scion of a wealthy family has chosen to settle. The apartment actually looks pretty normal for a college boy flopping in a New York tenement. But as the camera lingers over the grimy paint, you know you’re meant to grasp something meaningful about Tyler’s alienation from his bourgeois, better-painted background. Mostly, you admire the cinematographer Jonathan Freeman’s handiwork.Mr. Freeman also shot By the time Ally fulfills her narrative purpose she will have blossomed into a college student ripe for the heartstring plucking (a sympathetic Emilie de Ravin). The pickup artist who does the honors is, of course, Tyler, who asks her out at the urging of his obnoxious roommate, Aidan (Tate Ellington, persuasively irritating). Love blooms despite the flapping of parental hands and mouths, including those of Chris Cooper as Ally’s working-stiff father and  Pierce Brosnan as Tyler’s power-lawyer big daddy. Mr. Pattinson shoots Mr. Brosnan a lot of dark, hurting looks, but does his best work with Ruby Jerins, an appealing child actress who plays his sister, Caroline. When they’re together, Mr. Pattinson actually seems happy to be on screen: better yet, he doesn’t pull a James Dean Lite, he delivers.“Remember Me” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Gun violence and mass murder. REMEMBER MEOpens on Friday  nationwide. Directed by Allen Coulter; written by Will Fetters; director of photography, Jonathan Freeman; edited by Andrew Mondshein; music by Marcelo Zarvos; production designer, Scott P. Murphy; costumes by Susan Lyall; produced by Nicholas Osborne and Trevor Engelson; released by Summit Entertainment. Running time:  1 hour 53 minutes.AdvertisementWITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on March 12, 2010, on Page C10 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;