The Rocket
7.7
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe Times critic Manohla Dargis reviews "The Rocket."A pretty, somewhat sleepy and finally strange once-upon-a-time tale, The story is simple, blunt and vague. One day, a man in a military uniform passes out leaflets to local residents, who are summoned to a presentation at which it’s announced that they will be relocated to make way for a dam. Suddenly, everyone is on the move, Ahlo’s family included, hauling their meager worldly goods across the lush countryside, vividly shot by Andrew Commis. A terrible accident thins the family’s numbers, a calamity that the insufferable, wretched Taitok pins on Ahlo. Even Ahlo’s father, Toma (Sumrit Warin), who clenches his fists at the boy, seems to fault him. Soon, though, there are other problems to contend with, including the pitiful makeshift camp to which the family is relocated with scores of other bewildered villagers.Aside from a Socialist realist-style billboard and some oblique remarks, “The Rocket” avoids political complexities and specifics to concentrate on Ahlo and his everyday travails and adventures, including his new, romantically tinged friendship with a winsome, sad-eyed girl, Kia (Loungnam Kaosainam). She lives with her uncle, nicknamed Purple (Thep Phongam), an eccentric who, in homage to the singer James Brown, wears a deep purple suit and arranges his hair in a slick poof. Purple turns out to have a more interesting, far tougher and harsher history than his kitschy kookiness suggests, but — as is always the case with this movie — anything too ugly, depressing and politically pointed is soon muffled by adorable shenanigans and beauty shots of the landscape.This is the most recent movie from the Australian director What gives this movie its sting is that, despite Mr. Mordaunt’s insistent attempts at uplift, death hovers over this story at every single moment, from the truck filled with bombs on which the family hitches a ride to the eye-poppingly dangerous rocket contest that gives the movie its title. Here, every smile feels etched in sorrow.




A version of this review appears in print on January 10, 2014, on Page C17 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;