Men in Black 3
6.8
AdvertisementBy A.&#160;O. SCOTTCan you think of a new movie with less reason for existing than “Men in Black 3”? What? Apart from the urgent necessity of reminding us that The first We are back in the company of agents J and K — Mr. Smith and For the first 20 minutes or so, nothing special is going on, and it seems that “Men in Black 3” will be content to spin its wheels and collect its money en route through the usual overscaled action set pieces toward a superloud, planet-saving final showdown. The music sounds less like a score by Danny Elfman than like a score by Danny Elfman’s smartphone app, and it carries dreadful intimations of forced fun. But even as the movie carefully fulfills its blockbuster imperatives — with chases and explosions and elaborately contrived plot twists — it swerves into some marvelously silly, unexpectedly witty and genuinely fresh territory. Go figure.AdvertisementThe first sign of promise is the early appearance of the interplanetary supervillain, a leonine fellow named Boris who is confined to a maximum-security prison on the Moon. Boris is played with thunderous mock pomposity by Jemaine Clement, a great and eccentric comic talent who has improved every Hollywood movie he has appeared in (Boris and K have some history, a simmering grudge that long predates K’s partnership with J and that necessitates a bit of time travel. Somehow one of the oldest science-fiction tricks in the book — remember that AdvertisementThey meet him in the summer of 1969, shortly before the The New York Times film critics on “Men in Black 3,” “Moonrise Kingdom,” and “The Intouchables.”“What happened to you?” J keeps asking his jovial partner, and the joke is both that the question is never answered and that it doesn’t need to be.The action spins from Coney Island to Cape Kennedy (now Cape Canaveral), and the giddiness is spiked with metaphysical anxiety (thanks to Mr. Stuhlbarg’s quiet, existential freakiness) and disarming tenderness. The first two “Men in Black” movies did some spoofing of the conventions of the black and white, cross-generational buddy picture, but the third one finds its way back to the heart of the genre.It manages, in the end, to be touching as well as hectic and whimsical, and to send a few interesting thematic bubbles into the air, having to do with lost fathers, obscure regrets and racial reconciliation. So maybe there is a reason, after all.“Men in Black 3” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Cartoonishly violent deaths of (and by) aliens; swearing.





A version of this review appears in print on May 25, 2012, on Page C6 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;