The Hangover Part III
5.9
AdvertisementBy STEPHEN HOLDENThe Wolfpack rides again. Or rather, it limps exhaustedly over the tundra in what is billed as the final edition of the “Hangover” trilogy. Defanged, with glazed eyes and creaking joints, these superannuated party animals try vainly to stir up some enthusiasm during a return visit to Las Vegas, the site of the first “Hangover” movie. But their heart isn’t in it.As the expectant audience at the screening I attended waited for In case you need to be reminded, or somehow missed the earlier editions, “The Hangover Part III” concentrates more on Alan than the earlier movies did, and on their troublemaking sometime sidekick and nemesis, the whiny-voiced, sociopathic Asian gangster Mr. Chow (After the giraffe mishap, the other Wolfpack members stage an intervention to which Alan reluctantly agrees. While taking him to a rehab center, they are intercepted by a hulking mobster named Marshall (John Goodman) and his goons wearing pig masks. Marshall blames Chow for stealing millions of dollars of gold bricks and takes Doug as a hostage until Chow is brought to him, along with the gold.The story awkwardly zigzags to Mexico and back. When the guys discover that Chow is in Las Vegas, holed up in a heavily guarded penthouse suite with drugs and escorts at Caesars Palace, they re-enter Sin City — where all their troubles began — and try to capture him. These Las Vegas adventures are a sequence of perfunctory stunts: entering the penthouse from the roof on tied-together sheets, Chow’s escaping by parachute and the tedious chasing that pads out the movie.AdvertisementIn the most amusing scene set in Las Vegas, Alan and Cassie (Melissa McCarthy, in a cameo role as a mean-spirited pawnbroker) make goo-goo eyes at each other in a grotesque flirtation that involves the passing of a red lollipop from one mouth into another. The most strained and lifeless moment brings back Heather Graham’s character from the first “Hangover,” simply as a reference.At their best, the earlier “Hangover” movies were anarchic, absurdist farces descended from Abbott and Costello, the Three Stooges and the Hope-Crosby road movies, but with a libido inflamed by drugs and booze. In the spirit of those forerunners, the members of the Wolfpack may age, but they never learn from experience. One excuse for their naïveté is that most of their mayhem takes place while they are blind drunk. Their hangovers seem to last only a few minutes before they’re up and running.But the toll has been severe on the series, if not the characters. Only in a sight gag during the final credits is there a momentary flare-up of the old antic spirit. Otherwise, “The Hangover Part III” is dead.Goodbye and good riddance.“The Hangover Part III” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian) for strong language, brief nudity and violence.





A version of this review appears in print on May 23, 2013, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;