Shin Godzilla
7.6
AdvertisementBy NEIL GENZLINGERYou either like your “Godzilla” movies slick and high-budget, like the “Shin Godzilla,”It’s choppy and full of special effects that seem deliberately designed not to impress — except when they do. The story is so sketchy that it’s hard to follow, with a blizzard of characters and cameos that presumably mean more to a Japanese audience than to an American one. The film is at its best when it’s in parody mode, though it keeps that card too close to the vest for much of its two-hour length. The humor, not the monster, is what you’re left wanting more of.As the story opens, an abandoned boat being investigated by the authorities is suddenly jostled by what seems to be some sort of underwater volcano, or perhaps a water spout. Alone among the bumbling politicians and other officials who try to assess whether the disturbance is significant, a midlevel bureaucrat named Rando Yaguchi (Hiroki Hasegawa) realizes that a giant creature beneath the waves was responsible. Apparently he’s the only one who has seen any of Toho’s Rando and an American envoy (Satomi Ishihara) are the only characters who are given anything close to depth as the creature emerges from the water and marches on Tokyo. The original Godzilla arose from the fearfulness of the early nuclear age, and this 2016 Godzilla has a nuclear component too. The story also plays on Japan’s love-hate relationship with the United States, in a cursory, cheeky sort of way.It all comes down to whether to drop nuclear bombs on the beast — a radical step for Japan — or to try a less conventional idea that is akin to freeze-drying it. Before the destruction ends, there is one particularly tasty special-effects scene. It turns out that when a monster is on the loose, Japan’s ever-present trains are good for more than just transporting people.Advertisement“Shin Godzilla” is not rated. It is in Japanese, with English subtitles. Running time: 2 hours.




A version of this review appears in print on October 11, 2016, on Page C6 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;