127 Hours
7.6
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTIn April 2003 Aron Ralston, a 27-year-old hiker, fell and was trapped in a narrow slot in Blue John Canyon  in Utah, his right arm wedged against the rock wall by a boulder. But it was also, more pressingly, a practical challenge. Mr. Ralston, a trained engineer and a skilled, if sometimes careless, outdoorsman, understood his predicament, above all, as a series of technical problems. His solution was grisly and dramatic: using the blade of a cheap multipurpose tool, he cut off the immobilized arm between the elbow and the wrist, freeing himself after more than five days. Extreme as this action was, it was also logical, even downright ingenious.In bringing this horrific, perversely inspirational story to the screen, How do you make a startling, true anecdote into a dramatically satisfying feature film? How, more precisely, do you turn an experience of confinement and tedium — take a moment to consider the weight of that title — into a kinetic, suspenseful visual spectacle. How do you turn an immobilized protagonist into the hero of a motion picture, emphasis on motion?AdvertisementThe most obvious answer is that you cast AdvertisementAt times Mr. Franco resembles a Looney Tunes character drawn by Chuck Jones. On his mountain bike and then on foot, Aron zooms across the desert landscape like the Roadrunner, only to be transformed into Wile E. Coyote, tripped up by the laws of physics and dependent on Acme-style gadgets and gizmos.A guileless, naturally funny fellow, he narrates his plight into a small video camera, imagining himself at one point as both host and guest on a peppy daytime interview show, complete with audience response. Reflecting on the mistakes that brought him to this unhappy pass — in particular, neglecting to tell anyone where he was going — he finds there is only one word to sum it all up: But “127 Hours,” a chronicle of accident and determination, is nearly flawless. Mr. Franco’s goofball energy connects the viewer to the character almost instantly, and Mr. Boyle’s speedy, jumpy style sends us out into the desert on a wave of caffeine and rock ’n’ roll. Aron is hardly one for rapt Wordsworthian contemplation of nature; his romanticism, though deep, is sensual and hedonistic rather than quietly reverent.He wants to cover distances in record time with his headphones on and is happy to share his exuberance with whomever he happens to meet. Bumping into Kristi (Kate Mara) and Megan (Amber Tamblyn), two young women who seem to be lost, he charms and perplexes them with his knowledge of their surroundings and his casual adventurousness. The three of them frolic in an underground pool, they invite him to a party, and as he lopes off into the canyons one of them remarks, “I don’t think we figured in his day at all.”It is instructive to compare this movie’s Aron Ralston with Christopher McCandless, another real-life explorer whose unhappy encounter with the vast American wilderness was the subject of Sean Penn’s Aron, in contrast, is better adjusted and therefore somewhat more elusive. Though he mutters “please” and “thank you” to whatever unseen force may be watching over him, he is more concerned with physics than metaphysics. And though he leaves Blue John with renewed appreciation for other people — having hallucinated a former girlfriend (Clémence Poésy), various friends and his parents (Kate Burton and Treat Williams) while he was down there — he never really rejected them in the first place.Mr. Boyle has a knack for tackling painful, violent or unpleasant subjects with unremitting verve and unstoppable joie de vivre. He has dealt with some pretty ugly stuff over the years — poverty and violence in He is not one to chase after big ideas, preferring sensory intensity to reflection, but “127 Hours,” which Mr. Boyle wrote with Simon Beaufoy, his “Slumdog” writing partner, leaves you with a lot to think about, precisely because it is so attuned to the details of what is happening to Aron’s body.AdvertisementPerhaps it would be more accurate to say that the film leaves you with the impression of having lived, vicariously but intensely, through something whose meaning is both profound and elusive.There are scenes in “127 Hours” that are hard to bear — the cracking of a bone, the severing of a nerve, the desperate consumption of a water bag filled with urine — but what these moments communicate is more than worth a jolt of discomfort or a spasm of revulsion. To say that this movie gets under your skin is only barely a figure of speech. It pins you down, shakes you up and leaves you glad to be alive.“127 Hours” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Some swearing (understandable given the circumstances) and a very graphic scene of self-mutilation.127 HOURSOpens on Friday  nationwide. Directed by WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on November 5, 2010, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;