No Strings Attached
6.2
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTHaving recently endured starvation and battered toes in the service of her art, Let me check my notes. The name of this one is Ms. Portman, playing Emma, a Los Angeles doctor who works emergency room rotations, is quite a bit smaller and more emotionally complicated. What are these two doing together? A possible solution to the mystery emerges if you recall a particular scene involving Mila Kunis in “Black Swan.” Ms. Portman can now claim what appears to be a unique distinction: She may be the only Golden Globe-winning actress to simulate sex on screen with two former members of the cast of While the full import of that astonishing fact sinks in, let me say that “No Strings Attached,” directed by AdvertisementActually, it is rougher and randier than those movies, earning its R rating with a lot of naughty talk and a dose of semi-cynical sexual candor. The first scenes flail in the direction of various coarse comic subgenres, as we see an icky, awkward summer camp encounter, followed by a frat-house blowout in which we catch sight of AdvertisementThe one that predominates is basically “Love &amp; Other Drugs” without the disease. Like Anne Hathaway’s character in that movie, Ms. Portman’s is the one who insists on keeping things casual, physical and commitment-free. The arrangement that Adam and Emma agree upon is that they will have as much sex as they want — and Mr. Reitman’s way with montage suggests  that it’s a lot — without the emotional entanglements that everyone watching knows are inevitable and that they both want. Emma’s resistance seems particularly unmotivated. She obviously likes Adam but refuses to fall for him, as if adhering to a deeply held conviction or trying to win a bet.The pleasures of “No Strings Attached” are to be found in the brisk, easy humor of some of Ms. Meriwether’s dialogue and in the talented people scattered around Ms. Portman and Mr. Kutcher like fresh herbs strewn on a serving of overcooked fish. Kevin Kline, who played a goatish older literary gent in Mr. Kline has some room to work, but too many other actors are crowded into too few scenes. Chris Bridges (a k a Ludacris), as the owner of Adam’s favorite bar, could surely do more, and so could Olivia Thirlby as Emma’s radiantly monogamous younger sister. Lake Bell, as a smitten co-worker of Adam’s, is funny even as her character is set up from the start to be hurt and humiliated, a fate the film tries unconvincingly to soften.Adam and Emma have the requisite nutty friends, though Adam’s best pal, Eli (Jake Johnson), is much blander than the crude dude you would expect to find in his position. The film’s great squandered opportunity — and also the source of some of its best comic moments — is that Ms. Gerwig and How can this be? Why are these two entirely original and of-the-moment performers marginal players in this agreeable, lackluster picture and not stars of the year’s greatest girl-bromance? (Or whatever you’d call it; that no apt label exists is surely symptomatic.) To imagine Ms. Kaling and Ms. Gerwig in a remake of “No Strings Attached” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Some talk, some action.NO STRINGS ATTACHEDOpens on Friday  nationwide. Directed by WITH: 





Today’s Film Reviews: APPLAUSE, a Danish-language
film directed by Martin Pieter
Zandvliet. 11
DHOBI GHAT (MUMBAI DIARIES),
a Hindi- and English-language
film directed by Kiran Rao. 8
EVANGELION 2.0 YOU CAN (NOT)
ADVANCE, a Japanese-language
animated film directed by
Kazuya Tsurumaki, Masayuki
and Hideaki Anno. 8
GABI ON THE ROOF IN JULY, directed
by Lawrence Michael
Levine. 8
THE HOUSEMAID, a Korean-language
film directed by Im
Sang-soo. 10
JOHNNY MAD DOG, directed by
Jean-Stéphane Sauvaire. 8
LEMMY, a documentary directed
by Greg Olliver and Wes
Orshoski. 8
NO STRINGS ATTACHED, directed
by Ivan Reitman. 6
THE WAY BACK, directed by Peter
Weir. 1A version of this review appears in print on January 21, 2011, on Page C6 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;