The Wolverine
6.7
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTThe Times critic A. O. Scott reviews "The Wolverine."Though I sometimes tire of the sufferings of superheroes, I have a permanent soft spot for the Wolverine, the Marvel mutant whose indestructibility causes him endless physical and existential pain. As played by “The Wolverine,” directed by That would be Japan, where Logan (as the bewhiskered berserker is also known) witnesses the bombing of Nagasaki at the end of After a detour into present-day Alaska, where he proves himself a friend to grizzly bears and an enemy of hunters and personal grooming, Logan is spirited back to Japan. There he finds himself embroiled in a complicated family crisis involving yakuza, samurai, corporate bosses and corrupt politicians. To ensure that no Japanese cultural archetype goes unexploited, Logan’s guide and self-appointed bodyguard is a J-Pop warrior pixie named Yukio (Rila Fukushima) who brings a bright splash of anime color and energy to the movie.Yukio works for the dysfunctional and powerful Yashida clan, whose patriarch (Haruhiko Yamanouchi) Logan rescued from the radiation in Nagasaki. Yashida’s granddaughter Mariko (Tao Okamoto) serves as both damsel in distress — everyone in Japan wants to kidnap her, it seems — and Logan’s love interest. Because he is technically ageless, this is almost not creepy, but also not entirely convincing.I will leave the plot to spoil itself, pausing to take note of Svetlana Khodchenkova’s slinky femme fatale turn as the Viper and Famke Janssen’s ghostly appearance as Jean Grey, the long-dead love of Logan’s very long life. She appears in his dreams to remind him and the audience that within that adamantium skeleton beats a soft and sensitive heart.And Mr. Jackman, for all his growling, flexing and macho wisecracking, keeps our attention focused on Logan’s feelings. So does Mr. Mangold, even as he obeys the imperatives of the action-franchise machine. A modest superhero picture may sound like a contradiction in terms, but really it is a welcome respite. A short one, to be sure. An end-credits teaser — stay in your seat! — promises a planet-threatening spectacle to come, probably next summer. No wonder the Wolverine looks tired.“The Wolverine” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). The hero’s claws do a lot of killing, but the gore is edited away.





A version of this review appears in print on July 26, 2013, on Page C8 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;