The Chronicles of Narnia: Prince Caspian
6.6
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTHere in the unenchanted world of ordinary moviegoing, it has been about two and a half years  since When the exiled child kings and queens are thrown back into Narnia (thanks to a sudden outbreak of special effects in a London tube station), they seem no longer to be in a children’s fantasy story but rather in some kind of Jacobean tragedy, a reminder that C. S. Lewis was, along with everything else, a scholar of English Renaissance literature. In a dark castle in a dark forest, men with heavy armor and beard-shadowed faces quarrel and conspire. Instead of fauns and Turkish delight, there are murder and betrayal, and a grave, martial atmosphere lingers over the story,  even when the spunky dwarfs and chatty rodents return. (Aslan the lion also shows up eventually, speaking in the soothing voice of Liam Neeson.)So “Prince Caspian” is quite a bit darker than “The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe,” both in look and in mood. It is also in some ways more satisfying. Its violent (though gore-free) combat scenes and high body count may rattle very young viewers, but older children are likely to be drawn into the thick political intrigue. The relative scarcity of digital effects in the first part of the movie allows the director, Andrew Adamson, and  the director of photography, Karl Walter Lindenlaub, to explore the beauty of the Narnian landscape by more traditional cinematic means. Its lush glades and rocky escarpments provide a reminder that the supernaturalism of fairy tales originates in the magic of the natural world.And tales of heroic adventure, however fanciful, are grounded in human problems of power, cruelty and conflict. “Prince Caspian” is named for its square-jawed, rather bland hero (played by Ben Barnes), but its major source of dramatic energy is the villain, Caspian’s uncle Miraz, who is played with malignant grandeur by the great Italian actor Sergio Castellitto. Miraz is a classic royal usurper, who has taken the throne from Caspian’s father, the rightful king, and who plans to pass it along to his own newborn son once Caspian is out of the way. His court is a viper’s nest of double-dealing and shifting allegiance.AdvertisementCue grumpy dwarfs, swashbuckling mice and apple-cheeked Pevensies. And hail the popular struggle of the Narnian underground! Since the  Telmarines took over and suppressed the old magic, a hardy remnant of Narnians has been hiding amid the pacified trees, sustaining themselves with the legends of King Edmund (Skandar Keynes), Queen Lucy (Georgie Henley), Queen Susan (Anna Popplewell) and High King Peter (William Moseley). When these rulers return, they rescue Trumpkin (Peter Dinklage), a small, angry Narnian taken prisoner by Miraz’s soldiers, and eventually join Prince Caspian, who exchanges some long, half-smoldering looks with Susan.In spite of this hint of romance, what ensues is basically a war movie, with elaborate battle sequences in a castle courtyard and on a grassy plain, accompanied by thundering hoofbeats, whizzing arrows, clanking swords and Harry Gregson-Williams’s rousing score. These sections are ostensibly what the public wants to see, and certainly what the producers pay heavily to bring to life. There is a risk of sameness and tedium, which Mr. Adamson does not entirely overcome, though he and his fellow screenwriters, Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely, sprinkle in enough witty dialogue to keep the movie’s long middle from feeling like too much of a slog.The main characters, whose sometimes fractious sibling dynamic provided the first “Narnia” movie with a hint of psychological complexity, seem a little flatter here, as if they’ve grown accustomed to their jobs as action heroes. And “Prince Caspian” isn’t really about them, anyway, except insofar as the kids in the audience identify with their courage and good sense.AdvertisementThe cloak of allegory in which Lewis swathed the Narnia books is worn lightly on the screen, and some of their charm and novelty has been  chipped away —  not so much by any lapse on the part of the filmmakers as by a sense of familiarity. Tales of good and evil set in enchanted lands populated by mythical beasts are ubiquitous these days,  which may diminish the power of each new spell. The Pevensie children  can withdraw to London between episodes, but moviegoers are unlikely, and also perhaps unwilling, to escape from Narnia and the other increasingly numerous, and therefore increasingly mundane, places like it.“The Chronicles of Narnia: Prince Caspian” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). This rating may be a little misleading, since some of the violence is fairly intense, and some of the deaths may unsettle younger children.THE CHRONICLES OF NARNIA: PRINCE CASPIANOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by Andrew Adamson; written by Christopher Markus, Stephen McFeely and Mr. Adamson, based on the C. S. Lewis books; director of photography, Karl Walter Lindenlaub; edited by Sim Evan-Jones; music by Harry Gregson-Williams; production designer, Roger Ford; visual effects supervisors, Dean Wright and Wendy Rogers; produced by Mark Johnson, Philip Steuer and Mr. Adamson; released by Walt Disney Studios and Walden Media. Running time: 2 hours 12 minutes.WITH: Ben Barnes (Prince Caspian), William Moseley (Peter), Anna Popplewell (Susan), Skandar Keynes (Edmund), Georgie Henley (Lucy), Peter Dinklage (Trumpkin, the Red Dwarf), Warwick Davis (Nikabrik, the Black Dwarf), Sergio Castellitto (King Miraz), Pierfrancesco Favino (General Glozelle), Damián Alcázar (Lord Sopespian),  Vincent Grass (Doctor Cornelius), David Bowles (Lord Gregoire) and Liam Neeson (Voice of Aslan).





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page E1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;