The Lone Ranger
6.5
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTThe Times critic A. O. Scott reviews "The Lone Ranger."“Who was that masked man?” That is not a question likely to resonate much with young people today, unless they are asking it in earnest puzzlement. By young, I mean under 70. The Lone Ranger belongs to the ancient pop culture of Until now. Someone in the Disney-There are moments when this approach — which combines fussy, facetious knowingness with naïve, omnivorous enthusiasm — pays off nicely. The main action of “The Lone Ranger” takes place in a fantastical 1869 Texas, but it’s framed by scenes set in San Francisco in 1933, the year the Lone Ranger made his radio debut. As the half-built Golden Gate Bridge looms in the background, a young boy in cowboy duds and a black mask wanders into a Wild West fairground attraction, where he gazes on a taxidermied buffalo and grizzly bear, and also on an elderly American Indian with a dead crow on his head. A brass plate identifies him as “The Noble Savage in his Native Habitat.” The boy comes to know him as Tonto, and the rest of us recognize him, even under heavy prosthetic wrinkles, as Turning an aging, weary Tonto into a somewhat unreliable narrator signals that we are in a world of tall tales and strange myths, a universe of stories that fed the imaginations of many American children in the early and middle decades of the last century and that may strike their descendants as archaic and a little embarrassing. Sturdy western archetypes sit uncomfortably close to ugly ethnic stereotypes, and “The Lone Ranger” tries to imagine a wholesome, inclusive version of the western while reviving the time-tested touchstones of the genre.The result is a frantic grab bag of plots and themes, a semester-long Westerns 101 college course crammed into two and a half hours and taught by a professor whose lecture notes were rearranged by a gust of wind on his way to class. The wide-open spaces of AdvertisementThe Lone Ranger is Dan’s brother, John (Armie Hammer), an idealistic government lawyer who arrives in town armed with a copy of John Locke’s “Two Treatises of Government” and whose belief in the rule of law will be sorely tested. John, who does not carry a gun, carries a torch for his brother’s wife and eventually acquires a mysterious white horse, the “William Tell Overture” and the moniker kemo sabe, bestowed by his newfound sidekick, Tonto. Tonto also persuades him to cover his eyes, which generates a new spin on the old catchphrase: “What’s with the mask?”There is no doubting Mr. Verbinski’s appreciation of film history. He has seen and studied, at a minimum, AdvertisementIn the end, though, “The Lone Ranger” can’t quite pull off the daredevil feats it has assigned itself. This is an ambitious movie disguised as a popcorn throwaway, nothing less than an attempt to revise, reinvigorate and make fun of not just its source but also nearly every other western ever made. In trying to balance grandiosity with playfulness, to lampoon cowboy-and-Indian clichés while taking somber account of a history of violence, greed and exploitation, it descends into nerve-racking incoherence.Atrocities are followed by jokey riffs and sight gags, and what links them is not a creative sensibility (as would be the case in a Quentin Tarantino movie) but a carnival barker’s desperate need to hold on to a distracted audience’s attention. Look, kids, a man eating another man’s heart! A horse in a tree! A genocidal massacre! Bunny rabbits with sharp teeth! “Who was that masked man?” is a less relevant question than “What on earth were you thinking?”“The Lone Ranger” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). The violence, while frequently stylized and carefully edited, is actually more intense and nasty than the rating would suggest.





A version of this review appears in print on July 3, 2013, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;