Star Trek Beyond
7.2
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTMusing in his Captain’s Log as his birthday approaches, James Tiberius Kirk, his eyes as blue as the lens flare that accompanies the first shot of the Starship Enterprise, finds himself in a funk. “Things are starting to feel a little … episodic,” he confesses, in what even a sympathetic viewer might interpret as a meta-statement, a confession of franchise fatigue. So you can understand why James T., a good soldier and also a bit of a loose cannon, might want to break out of the rut, and the title of the latest movie, The Times critic A.O. Scott reviews “Star Trek Beyond.”Which is not, in itself, a bad thing. Not every wheel needs reinventing, and one of the abiding pleasures of “Star Trek,” in its old and newer iterations, lies in its balance of stubborn consistency and canny inventiveness. The characters never change, but the stakes can shift wildly from one adventure to the next. Fans love “Star Trek” precisely because of its episodic nature, which allows for a certain amount of variation in theme and tone. Sometimes the future of the universe hangs in the balance. Sometimes Kirk and his crew have to deal with local disputes and personnel issues. Or weird random stuff, like Unfortunately, 21st-century big-budget action movies are made according to a more rigid template, and “Beyond” follows its immediate predecessors, AdvertisementUp until the tedious and bombastic finish, though, you can have a pretty good time. In his work on the “Fast and Furious” movies, Mr. Lin has shown a playful willingness to extend — and, if necessary, suspend — the laws of physics, and his visual brashness can be a refreshing antidote to Mr. Abrams’s fussy tries to combine digital spectacle with old-fashioned cinematic discipline.A preview of the film.Most important, the gang’s all here, and Mr. Lin proves once again to be an adept ensemble wrangler. Kirk grins and grimaces his way through yet another existential career crisis (and also does some motorcycle stunt driving). Spock (AdvertisementOn the surface of a distant planet, the crew encounters a new nemesis and a new ally. The big baddie is a murderous warlord named Krall (Sometimes, I have to say, the scientific breakthroughs feel a little too convenient. Jaylah has some kind of technology that makes giant spaceships invisible, and another kind that shoots fast-drying resin (or something). And there is some business at the end on an enormous space station that I did not buy for a minute. The nerd in me wants a bit more rigor, a bit more plausibility underneath the exuberant fakery. Maybe in the next episode.“Star Trek Beyond” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Nothing out of the ordinary. Running time: 2 hours.





A version of this review appears in print on July 22, 2016, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;