Man of Steel
7.1
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISZack Snyder, the director of “Man of Steel,” narrates a scene from the film.At once frantically overblown and beautifully filigreed, “Man of Steel” will turn on everyone it doesn’t turn off. Summer blockbusters have a way of encouraging multiplex Manichaeism, though I propose a middle way. It won’t be easy. Even those who patiently ride out the bludgeoning excesses of the film’s final 45 minutes may wonder what happened to the movie — the one about human and humanoid struggles — they watched for the first 100. They may also wonder why no one, anyone, smacked the director, Apocalypse Now (a movie that Mr. Snyder For starters, return to basics, and add a fighting-trim He does all that in “Man of Steel,” which was written by AdvertisementThese graceful contours are further picked up in spaceships that float like jellyfish and in suits of armor that evoke crustaceans, adding to this alien world’s striking conceptual unity. Lovely and imperious, the headdresses are also emblems of the countervailing forces that have led to the ruin of Krypton, a civilization undone by its own advances. The resemblances to Earth are blunt enough for an eco-savvy kindergartner and pop off the screen like speech balloons. But, then, this is Superman, and Mr. Snyder, whose earlier movies include a stillborn adaptation of the graphic novel “Watchmen,” is here playing with different narrative forms as he toggles between cinematic realism and the kind of comic-book-style exaggeration that distills ideas into images.The birth of Superman, who’s given the name Kal-El, opens the film and precedes Krypton’s end. Jor-El and his wife, Lara Lor-Van (the Israeli actress Ayelet Zurer), decide to rocket their child to Earth, sending him off to safety in the futuristic equivalent of Moses’ basket. Given that Superman’s creators, Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster, were Jewish, much has been written about Superman’s similarities to Moses (“el” is a Hebrew word for God), which is complicated by the character’s likeness to Jesus. (Superman’s Earth mom was originally named AdvertisementThis superhero flambé aside, the oil platform is most notable for the workingmen Superman rescues, laboring brothers to the trapped coal miners who figure into For roughly 100 minutes, or the running time of an average movie, Mr. Snyder is in control of his material. His handling of the story’s many flashbacks, which fill in piecemeal Superman’s Kansas childhood as Clark, is fluid and apt. Each return to the past becomes another tile in the mosaic, adding to the emerging portrait of the adult wanderer and seeker he has become. His adoptive parents, Martha (The Times critic Manohla Dargis reviews "Man of Steel."To be human or not to be is Superman’s great question, a schism that evokes other familiar God-human divides. It’s one that he struggles with in his fights with an alien foe, General Zod (Mr. Shannon), and in his attraction to Lois Lane (Ms. Adams). It’s hard to believe that any actor could compete with Terence Stamp’s dandified turn as Zod in the 1978 “Superman,” but Mr. Shannon, delightfully embracing gnashing-teeth villainy, proves one of the new film’s strengths. A true Krypton believer, Zod has his own good reasons for chasing after the being he knows as Kal-El. While these add another layer, they and everything else are almost lost in the last 45 minutes, when Mr. Snyder piles on the hammering special effects, becoming yet one more director gone disappointingly amok.That’s too bad, because if you wave away all the computer-generated smoke and see past the pulverized buildings, it’s possible to remain hooked on the resonant origin story that wends through “Man of Steel” — that of the immigrant. It’s a story that begins with the launching of the spaceship and continues through a child’s pained attempts to assimilate and a young man’s sense of not belonging. In his excellent 1987 essay “What Makes Superman So Darned American,” Gary D. Engle wrote that “Superman raises the American immigrant experience to the level of religious myth.” Mr. Snyder isn’t capable of mythmaking, but in his sometimes poetic, sometimes crude way, he has given Superman a new lease on franchise life by affirming that this most American hero is also an alien yearning to breathe free.“Man of Steel” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Parental death, alien battles and annihilated worlds.





A version of this review appears in print on June 14, 2013, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;