The Hunt for Red October
7.6
LEAD: Very early in ''The Hunt for Red October,'' Marko Ramius (Sean Connery), the captain of a new, atomic-powered, top-of-the-line Soviet submarine named the Red October, barehandedly murders a fellow officer aboard ship.
Very early in ''The Hunt for Red October,'' Marko Ramius (Sean Connery), the captain of a new, atomic-powered, top-of-the-line Soviet submarine named the Red October, barehandedly murders a fellow officer aboard ship.

The captain seems to be mad. He's been reading about Armageddon and it's known that he has been despondent ever since his wife died.

Good grief - a maniac in charge of a ship equipped with enough missiles to wipe out virtually every major city in the United States!

What's worse is that the Red October has a new hydropropulsion system, a technological breakthrough, which allows it to escape detection by even the most sophisticated sonar equipment. Only a hotshot sonar engineer would be able to tell the difference between the sounds of the Red October and the mating of whales.

It's conceivable that the lunatic captain could remain submerged off Coney Island and incinerate everything between the Ferris wheel and Denver. Is there no hope for mankind? On and off the pulses pound as the mind prepares to reel.

John McTiernan's ''Hunt for Red October,'' based on the Tom Clancy suspense novel, begins with a screen note to the effect that the events portrayed took place in November 1984, shortly before Mikhail S. Gorbachev became leader of the Soviet Union. The note adds, ''Nothing of what you are about to see ever happened.''

In terms of logic and politics, ''The Hunt for Red October'' is most peculiar, but it's not without its entertaining moments.

It's an elegy for those dear, dark, terrible days of the cold war, when it was either them or us, and before the world had become so thoroughly fractured that it's no longer possible to know exactly who the thems are.

It's the kind of movie in which the characters, like the lethal hardware, are simply functions of the plot, which in this case seems to be a lot more complex than it really is. Because everybody knows that the terrible things that might happen can't (or the movie would betray its genre), the only question is how they will be averted.

As a director, Mr. McTiernan, who got a lot of mileage out of some unlikely terrorists holding up a Los Angeles office building in ''Die Hard,'' is a hard-working mechanic. He and his screenwriters, Larry Ferguson and Donald Stewart, keep the movie puffing along. Among other revelations, Captain Ramius is not quite the madman he appeared to be at first.

The movie's explanation: the captain is Lithuanian, not Russian. Yet the complications accumulate.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff meet in Washington to debate whether Captain Ramius is planning a first assault on the United States, or maybe a defection. Only the audience knows for sure.

Washington dispatches Jack Ryan (Alec Baldwin), a plucky C.I.A. agent who once met the captain, to the scene of the hunt. The movie dashes from London to Moscow to Washington to the Sea of Murmansk, the time and place of each new sequence announced in computer script that sounds top-secret important as it rat-a-tats onto the screen.

At one point, the Red October is being hunted by both the United States and Soviet fleets. The Russians are trying to torpedo their own ship. Aboard the Red October, the atomic reactor is verging on meltdown and a saboteur is trying to destroy the vessel from within.

It's both too much and not enough. It's fun in fits and starts, but also sort of lazy. Mr. McTiernan is not a subtle director. Punches are pulled constantly. The audience is told by word and soundtrack music when it should fear the worst, though the action on the screen gives the lie to such warnings.

The movie finally is never very convincing. Even the special effects aren't great.

Mr. Connery, however, wears the movie as if it were a favorite old hat. He makes it look good. The role barely exists but he gives it respectability and elan.

The other members of the cast also do what they can with short rations. In addition to Mr. Baldwin, those who manage to look more important than the radar, sonar and computer screens include Scott Glenn, James Earl Jones, Richard Jordan and Tim Curry. 

''The Hunt for Red October,'' which has been rated PG (''Parental Guidance Suggested''), includes some mildly vulgar language. 
