Iron Man 3
7.2
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe Times critic Manohla Dargis reviews "Iron Man 3."Right before I saw And so, once again, Tony Stark a k a Iron Man a k a The only significant difference between “Iron Man 3” and others of its type is that it is opening a few weeks after the The makers of “Iron Man 3” — including the director, Shane Black, who wrote the script with Drew Pearce — could not, of course, have known that their carefully engineered entertainment would open so soon after the Boston attack. Yet the explosions in the movie, as well as its plot elements — among them the threat of terrorist violence, homegrown terrorism, American soldiers and improvised explosive devices — made it impossible not to think about the marathon. When a Los Angeles landmark is blown up on screen, a twist rendered with the usual state-of-the-art digital technology, all I could think was how clean it looked without the pools of blood and grotesquely severed body parts.Not that anyone wants to see that, especially with kids in the theater. (The movie is rated PG-13.) “Iron Man 3” is conspicuously meant to be escapist entertainment (a pathetic conceit, given what it says movie people think about real life — or rather the real lives of their customers). But Mr. Black and his colleagues, like other filmmakers who use the iconography of Sept. 11 and its aftershocks, want to have it both ways.AdvertisementThey want to tap into the powerful reactions those events induced, while dodging the complex issues and especially the political arguments that might turn off ticket buyers. The result is that in some movies Sept. 11 — along with Afghanistan, Iraq, terrorism, the war on terror and torture — registers as just a device, at once inherently political and empty, in a filmmaker’s tool kit.Advertisement“Iron Man 3” uses that iconography in the extreme, with a terrorist figurehead, the Mandarin (The story takes place after the events of That’s more or less it, give or take a few explosions. Those are loud and generally less impressive than Mr. Pearce and especially Mr. Kingsley, who turn in the sort of engaged performances that Mr. Downey no longer gives in the franchise. The With his puckishness and fast motor, he remains an almost ineffably appealing presence. Yet in “Iron Man 3” he essentially functions as the delivery system for a repertory of Tony Stark poses, gestures, expressions and line readings that, with his superhero costume, established the “Iron Man” brand on screen.For his part, Mr. Black made his name scribbling breezy action movies like Given the industrial makeup and commercial demands of a movie like “Iron Man 3,” it’s hard to know how much Mr. Black brought to it; his touch is largely evident in the banter and perhaps the swinging retro music over the end credits. Before he left as director, Mr. Favreau had already mentioned that the Mandarin would be in the movie.Which brings me to a speech that Steven Soderbergh, who has announced his retirement from filmmaking, He wondered why a studio would spend so much money to release a big franchise sequel like this: “Is there anyone in the galaxy that doesn’t know ‘Iron Man’ is opening on Friday?” More instructively, he also suggested why studios have become so dependent on big movies, including money, fear, lack of vision and leadership. Studio executives deserve much of the blame for “pushing cinema out of mainstream movies,” as he put it, but “what people go to the movies for” has also changed since Sept. 11.Mr. Soderbergh said he thought that the country still has post-traumatic stress disorder “and that we haven’t really healed in any sort of complete way and that people are, as a result, looking more toward escapist entertainment.”AdvertisementThe studios have long made escapist movies, many wonderful. One problem, as thoughtful filmmakers like Mr. Soderbergh and others have expressed with alarm and frustration, is that the big studios have hitched so much of their resources to so-called tent poles meant to keep studios up and going in lean times.As a consequence, it has become difficult for filmmakers to make midlevel studio movies for adults who value thought over action, narrative ambiguity over blunt spectacle. Good big movies are still released and sometimes even produced by the studios. Among the most satisfying films of the past decade are some from “Iron Man 3,” by contrast, at once invokes Sept. 11 and dodges it, and does so with a wink and a smile. It’s not the first movie to do so, by any means. But the proximity of its highly publicized release to the Boston Marathon bombings simply makes it the latest, most conspicuous example of how profoundly disconnected big studio movies of this sort are from the world in which the rest of us live.The point isn’t that movies like “Iron Man 3” don’t have any business taking on tough issues. The point is that if they are to be worthy of the art, worthy of the audience and its time and its money, worthy of the legacy of those Hollywood movies that comforted and cheered Americans through world wars and bleak times, they should take on the toughest issues — not just exploit them.“Iron Man 3” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Violence.





A version of this review appears in print on May 3, 2013, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;