Southpaw
7.4
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTConnoisseurs of boxing sometimes wax eloquent on the nuances of the sport, but boxing movies tend to value impact over finesse. Few genres are so reliably and bluntly conventional. Primal stories — rise and fall, ruin and redemption, the love of a good woman — are punctuated by scenes of carefully choreographed pugilism. Violence and sentimentality dance in the ring, and the audience leaves satisfied, if not exactly surprised.If 
                The director and cameramen discuss how they filmed the visceral fight scenes in the boxing drama.            Not that Billy has much privilege to check, racial or otherwise. We first encounter him defending his title with a late-round knockout at Madison Square Garden, which an announcer notes is a few blocks (and also “a million miles”) from the Hell’s Kitchen orphanage where the champ grew up. His wife, Maureen (Rachel McAdams), is also a product of the foster-care system, and they’ve gone to great lengths to ensure that their beloved 10-year-old daughter, Leila (Oona Laurence), is protected from the kind of life they knew. Billy throws the punches, and Maureen, as he puts it, “makes all the plans.”But you can’t plan for every twist of fate. Unless you’re a screenwriter, of course, and the author of the “Southpaw” script, Kurt Sutter, torques this baby until it screams. A loudmouth challenger (Miguel Gomez) taunts Billy at a charity event. Words are exchanged, fists fly, and a gunshot robs Billy of everything he has. He loses his wife, his mansion, his cars, his title and custody of Leila, who is placed in child-services limbo under the eye of a social worker played by Naomie Harris. Abandoned by his manager (Curtis Jackson, better known as 50 Cent), Billy sets out to take back what he can. He walks into a scruffy New York gym and finds a battered, philosophical trainer named Willis with the melancholy mien of Forest Whitaker.The Times critic A. O. Scott reviews “Southpaw.”There isn’t really much more you need to know. The plotting is somehow both flat-footed and operatic in its absurdity. Character arcs are tangled, flattened and foreshortened. Common sense is knocked silly. But Mr. Fuqua has never been a director to let ridiculousness get in the way of visceral action. With a new Eminem song tucked into one of the montages, an old-style melodramatic score by AdvertisementThe same goes for Mr. Gyllenhaal, whose recent performances have been both impressive and more than a little mannered — bouts of showy extremism. In “Southpaw,” his mumbling seems as studious as his fastidious enunciation in “And you’re definitely watching a real boxing movie, which is of course not the same as a movie about the reality of the sport (despite participation by the former multiweight champion It wouldn’t be a fight picture without a ruthless businessman, a gruff coach or a suffering wife. And this wouldn’t be a review of a boxing picture without a few clichés of its own. I wish I could say “Southpaw” was a knockout, or even a contender, that it went the distance or scored on points. But it’s strictly an undercard bout, displaying enough heart and skill to keep the paying customers from getting too restless.“Southpaw” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Blood in the ring and out, and a lot of swearing. 





A version of this review appears in print on July 24, 2015, on Page C5 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;