The Love Witch
7.0
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTT“The Love Witch” is, among other things, a study in the color red. Elaine, whose vocation is succinctly captured in the title of Not that the film is monochromatic, by any means. Shot and designed with admirably compulsive attention to tone and composition, That her charms turn out to be lethal may or may not be Elaine’s fault. Her stated answer to Freud’s notorious question about what women want is straightforward and retrograde. Women want to be loved by men — completely, absolutely, for who they really are — and, in exchange for this, they offer sex. Or “sex magick,” to be precise, an occult art of potions and spells and strip teases practiced by other women (and maybe a few men) who share Elaine’s beliefs. Elaine directs her magic at a college professor, a friend’s fiancé and, finally, a macho detective investigating occult goings-on.Using a palette evocative of both 1950s Hollywood AdvertisementThe fear of female sexuality has been a staple of horror movies forever, but “The Love Witch” does more than simply subvert or parody the erotic underpinnings of the genre. The deliberately stilted acting and the baroque artificiality of the settings — a potpourri of New Age, Victoriana, midcentury American Square and Renaissance Faire hippie — bespeak a high degree of self-consciousness, but it would be a mistake to view the movie simply as a spoof or a goof. Its humor is too subtle and strange for that, and the emotions that ground the story are too strong and complicated. The tale itself often drifts away from the suspense-driven logic of conventional horror into realms of gauzy romance, surreal grotesquerie and demented trippiness.Elaine scrambles every available gender signal, embodying and demolishing clichés in ways that will set off interesting, potentially awkward discussions once the movie is over. She smashes the distinctions that structure contemporary debates about feminism and women — between power and submission, objectification and empowerment, sisterhood and individualism, victimhood and vengeance.But in any case, her glamour — in the old, root sense that aligns the word with sorcery and enchantment — is impossible to resist. Ms. Biller’s movie, like its heroine, presents a fascinating, perfectly composed, brightly colored surface. What’s underneath is marvelously dark, like love itself.“The Love Witch” is not rated. Running time: 2 hours.





A version of this review appears in print on November 18, 2016, on Page C8 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;