Revolutionary Road
7.3
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThere is a lot of jittery cigarette smoking and sloshed-down booze in Frank and April  —  Nothing much happens in the story, just two ordinary lives coming apart at the seams. Like the novel, the film begins with a disastrous community theater production of Things continue to fall apart as Frank shuffles between the traps of office and home, and briefly into the arms of another woman (Zoe Kazan). There’s a short, sweet reprieve when, out of the blue, April decides that the only escape for her and Frank is to pack up the kids and move to Paris, where, she insists, he will at long last be able to find himself and become the man she desperately wants him to be. Paris will be their way out of suburbia and the ticky-tacky little box on a hillside on that cruelly named street, Revolutionary Road. But it’s also clear from the deadening claustrophobia of “Revolutionary Road” is the kind of great novel that Hollywood tends to botch, because much of it takes place inside the heads of its characters, and because the Wheelers aren’t especially likeable and  because pessimism without obvious redemption is a tough sell. It’s hard to think of many directors who could do it justice: Nicholas Ray, who in films like AdvertisementCertainly there’s no shortage of talent in the movie, which displays all the fastidious attention to detail  —  the sack suits that seem to be swallowing Frank whole, the touches of Danish modern in the Wheeler living room  —  you expect from this kind of prestige production. Mr. Mendes himself is a prestige number, of course, as are the two appealing stars, who shed a great deal of sweat and tears trying to put across their characters. They enter the story with their fists in the air, and it isn’t long before they’re slugging away at each other, absorbing low blows and landing brutal hits, which they continue to do to the bitter end, in between angry, accusatory speeches about the lousiness of their lives.AdvertisementIf those blows don’t resonate, it’s largely because Mr. Mendes’s investment in this story feels professional, diagnostic. Part of what makes the novel so powerful, beyond its familiar American theme of self-discovery, is its unwavering fury and how each intimate and acid word feels personal, as if Yates had dredged them up from some place deep inside his own being. No one gets off the hook in “Revolutionary Road,” least of all its author, whose insistence on stripping his characters down to the marrow is so relentless it can’t help but feel like an act of self-flagellation. As a film director, at least, Mr. Mendes comes across as too coolly diffident for that kind of blazing heat. He keeps his distance.Mr. DiCaprio closes that distance in a few scenes in which you see Frank’s fear  —  of failure and of success too — mixing in with his vanity: with his wide, uncertain, panicked face he shows you what a dreamer without a dream looks like. Ms. Winslet, who’s married to Mr. Mendes, has a tougher time with April, who comes across as something of a noble sufferer when, as a minor character (a memorable Michael Shannon) cannily intuits, she has always played an active part in the Wheeler Family Tragedy. Mr. Mendes stages this tragedy grandly, symbolically  —  in one scene he places April and Frank in front of their car headlights to emphasize that they’re playing a role  —  forgetting that this isn’t just theater, but also something like life.“Revolutionary Road” is rated R. (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian.) Adult words and traumas.





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;