Dragon Blade
6.1
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISAll fighting, all grimacing — though sometimes all smiling, weeping and singing — “Dragon Blade” is the kind of nutsy maximalist entertainment that isn’t content merely to tap a handful of influences. Instead, it stuffs an entire encyclopedia of dicey ideas (visual, narrative, political) into a blender to create a wacky, eyeball-popping and -glazing extravaganza that suggests a The least interesting question to ask about a movie like “Dragon Blade” is whether it’s any good. Of course it isn’t, not especially, but questions of quality pale next to the greater headscratcher: What is it? For starters, it is a Jackie Chan vehicle, a period story, a Chinese production and a huge 2015 box-office Whatever it is, it is also about putting on a really big show with your pals, who here include both the fantastically outfitted constituencies of 36 nations who swirl around the Silk Road and a legion of Roman soldiers who materialize on it one day, having apparently taken a wrong turn on the Appian Way. The clotted story involves how these different groups are juggled with a broad smile and some fancy footwork by Huo An (Mr. Chan), the leader of the Silk Road guard. A jolly, friendly warrior with chin fuzz, some swinging Heidi braids and the kind of intricately detailed costume that turns seamstresses blind, Huo insists on giving peace a chance, even when dodging arrows shot by Cold Moon (Lin Peng), one of the few women in what is otherwise an enormous brotherly be-in.Mr. Chan has slowed considerably since his glory action years, even if he still dodges and darts with elastic grace. His character is on the dull side and is mostly a hub for all the swirling parts that Mr. Lee puts into motion. There are many of these, because Mr. Lee, like Michael Bay and other specialists in the art of cinematic mayhem, likes to throw everything at the screen that a monster budget can give him. And, other than women, “Dragon Blade” has a whole lot of everything, including armies of extras, herds of horses, truckloads of feathered-and-furred costumes, bushels of strikingly styled hair, innumerable crane shots and choreographed fights. There’s also a blind Roman boy with a blond mop who sings a nationalist ditty and brings the multitudes to collective tears.There are special effects, too, though none as jaw-slackening as the performances from Mr. Cusack and Mr. Brody. Mr. Cusack plays General Lucius, who has ended up on the Silk Road in an effort to protect Publius (Jozef Liu Waite), the warbling babe, from his older brother, General Tiberius (Mr. Brody). Mr. Brody either took his role seriously or can keep a straight face better than Mr. Cusack, whose contortionist expressions tend to suggest someone desperate not to let loose either laughter or bowels. Mr. Brody, by contrast, takes to his villainous role with old-fashioned Basil Rathbone hauteur, swaggering and twirling while leading with his profile. At one point, Mr. Brody even runs his tongue over his bloody hand, as if to acknowledge just how finger-licking good his role is.“Dragon Blade” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Swords, arrows, bodies!





A version of this review appears in print on September 4, 2015, on Page C3 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;