The Rite
6.0
AdvertisementBy STEPHEN HOLDEN“What did you expect? Spinning heads? Pea soup?” Father Lucas Trevant (As the son of an undertaker preparing for the priesthood Michael is familiar with gruesome evisceration. In the throes of a spiritual crisis that threatens his faith, he has traveled to the Vatican, where he is dispatched by the sinister, glowering Father Xavier (Ciaran Hinds) to witness Father Lucas practice his brand of hocus-pocus. Father Lucas’s current subject, Rosaria (Marta Gastini), is a pregnant 16-year-old who has been raped by her father and exhibits signs of demonic possession. Contorting her body, raking her fingernails against the wall, the poor girl, if you’ll pardon the joke, is going through hell.Michael is certain that her symptoms, no matter how alarming, must have a medical explanation. Is it the devil’s work or a psychiatric disorder? That is the spurious debate that sputters along in this dull, pretentiously verbose movie that (need it be said?) enthusiastically takes the devil’s side.This supernatural thriller —  suggested by The demonic voice that growls from within Rosaria is not as frightening nor is its language as colorful as Mercedes McCambridge’s effusions in AdvertisementMost important, nobody, but nobody, cracks the semblance of a smile unless it is a Mephistophelean grin. Why? Because life is very, very serious, and evil is too prevalent for there to be room for laughter, pleasure, enjoyment or humor of any kind. The predominant facial expression is a suspicious, paranoid acknowledgment of universal complicity in diabolical evil. “The Rite” fruitlessly throws in a nonlove interest in Angeline (Alice Braga), a glum reporter who witnesses the strange goings-on and is impressed.At least “The Rite” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has violence, frightening images and mild sexual references.THE RITEOpens on Friday  nationwide. Directed by Mikael Hafstrom; written by Michael Petroni, suggested by the book by Matt Baglio; director of photography, Ben Davis; edited by David Rosenbloom; music by Alex Heffes; production design by Andrew Laws; costumes by Carlo Poggioli; produced by Beau Flynn and Tripp Vinson; released by Warner Brothers Pictures. Running time: 1 hour 49 minutes.WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on January 28, 2011, on Page C10 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;