The Girl Next Door
6.8
AdvertisementBy NEIL GENZLINGERIf you’re going to make a film as repellent as “Jack Ketchum’s the Girl Next Door,” you had better make sure that your redeeming reasons for doing so are crystal clear. Gregory M. Wilson, the film’s director, either doesn’t have any such reasons or doesn’t know how to convey them, which means that he has made the kind of movie that makes you wish you could rinse your brain in bleach, to wash all traces of it from your memory.“The Girl Next Door,”The story, in a narrative device that has become a cliché, is told through the grown-up eyes of Ruth’s 12-year-old neighbor, David (Daniel Manche as a child; William Atherton as an adult), who observes more than participates in the abuse.David pals around with Ruth’s sons, and Mr. Wilson at first goes for the bittersweet tone of In the real case (also the subject of AdvertisementSo we get to see the abuse — little is left to the imagination — without understanding it. Blythe Auffarth, who is in her 20s, doesn’t look particularly convincing as the 14-year-old Megan, but it’s just as well that a child actor wasn’t used, given what is done to her.“Jack Ketchum’s the Girl Next Door” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has nudity, rape, torture and strong language. JACK KETCHUM’S THE GIRL NEXT DOOROpens today in Manhattan. Directed by Gregory M. Wilson; written by Daniel Farrands and Philip Nutman, based on the novel by Jack Ketchum; director of photography, William M. Miller; edited by M. J. Fiore; music by Ryan Shore; production designers, Krista Gall and Jeff Subik; produced by Mr. Miller and Andrew van den Houten; released by ModernCiné. At the Two Boots Pioneer Theater, 155 East Third Street, at Avenue A, East Village. Running time: 91 minutes.WITH: Daniel Manche (David Moran), Blythe Auffarth (Megan Loughlin), Madeline Taylor (Susan Loughlin), Blanche Baker  (Ruth Chandler), William Atherton (David Moran as an adult), Austin Williams (Woofer), Benjamin Ross Kaplan (Donny) and Graham Patrick Martin (Willie Jr.)





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page E7 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;