The Lovely Bones
6.7
Saoirse Ronan stars as Susie Salmon in “The Lovely Bones,” directed by Peter Jackson. 
                            We all like children, and &mdash; at least in our capacity as moviegoers, book-club members and consumers of true-life melodrama &mdash; we seem to like them best when they&rsquo;re abused, endangered or dead. Nothing else is quite so potent a symbol of violated innocence, a spur to pious sentiment or a goad to revenge as a child in peril. This is hardly news (Charles Dickens made a nice living trafficking in the suffering of minors), but for some reason the past decade has seen an epidemic of cinematic and literary crimes against the young.        Profile: Peter Jackson

                            Ms. Sebold pushes the dead-child narrative to an emotional extreme, and at the same time undermines its exploitive tendencies, by means of a simple and radical formal device. She makes the victim, a daughter of &rsquo;70s suburbia named Susie Salmon (&ldquo;like the fish&rdquo;), an omniscient, beyond-the-grave narrator, with a lively voice and a comfortable perch in the afterlife from which to survey the doings of her family, her friends and the neighbor who killed her. The novel is conceived with enough audacity to make this gimmick intriguing, and executed with enough art to make it effective.        
                            Mr. Jackson&rsquo;s film, from a script he wrote with Fran Walsh and Philippa Boyens, his frequent collaborators, shows less audacity and too much art. Susie&rsquo;s unearthly home, in the book a minimally sketched, nondenominational purgatory where the dead loiter on their way to heaven and keep tabs on unfinished business down on earth, has been expanded into a digitally rendered Wonderland of rioting metaphors, crystal seas and floating topiary. It&rsquo;s a mid-&rsquo;70s art-rock album cover brought to life (and complemented by a score composed by the &rsquo;70s art-rock fixture 
                            Accordingly Mr. Jackson&rsquo;s interest in the &ldquo;in-between,&rdquo; as this suburb of heaven is called, is primarily visual. The drama is all down below, where the surviving members of the Salmon family contend with the loss of their eldest child. Susie&rsquo;s sister, Lindsey, is played by Rose McIver; her brother, Buckley, by Christian Thomas Ashdale, while George Harvey (
                            She is, in any case, obsessed with the lives that go on without her, in particular with the ways her siblings and friends and father (
                            Yes, he grooves on the wild color schemes and peculiar fashions of 1973. (Richard Kelly had a similar field day with 1976-vintage patterned wallpaper and fat neckties in 
                            But it does not move. Or, rather, as it skitters and lurches from set piece to the next, papering the gaps with swirls of montage, it never achieves the delicate emotional coherence that would bring the story alive. My point is not that Mr. Jackson and his fellow screenwriters have taken undue liberties with the book, a complaint that some other critics have made. On the contrary, the problem with this &ldquo;Lovely Bones&rdquo; is that it dithers over hard choices, unsure of which aspects of Ms. Sebold&rsquo;s densely populated, intricately themed novel should be emphasized and which might be winnowed or condensed.        
                            The filmmakers&rsquo; evident affection for the book expresses itself as a desperate scramble to include as much of it as possible, which leaves the movie feeling both overcrowded and thin. The anguish in the Salmon household is dutifully observed: dad smashes his collection of model ships, mom withdraws and then flees to California, and in the middle of it grandma arrives, a brassy boozer played by Susan Sarandon. But there is a puppet-show quality to their grief, and also to the puzzlement of the detective (Michael Imperioli) investigating Susie&rsquo;s death and the sorrow of her schoolmates, Ruth (Carolyn Dando) and Ray (Reece Ritchie), the object of Susie&rsquo;s first and last major crush.        
                            The title of &ldquo;The Lovely Bones&rdquo; refers to the relationships among these people that knit together in Susie&rsquo;s absence. In Mr. Jackson&rsquo;s version, though, they are hastily and haphazardly assembled, so that nothing quite fits together. The movie is a serial-killer mystery, a teenage melodrama, a domestic tragedy and a candy-hued ghost story &mdash; a cinematic version of the old parlor game in which disparate graphic elements are assembled into a single strange picture. It&rsquo;s sometimes called Exquisite Corpse.        



                            Directed by 
                            WITH: Our legacy from the war in Iraq will be written in the lives of the people we have left behind.What did an imprisoned Times columnist have to do with a postwar best seller?Vladimir V. Putin&rsquo;s return to the Kremlin in 2012 diminishes the possibility that Russia will evolve into a stable democracy.