Chappie
6.9
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe Times critic Manohla Dargis reviews “Chappie.”Frankenstein’s monster gets a titanium makeover in “Chappie,” a science-fiction blood-spurter and would-be heart-warmer that wavers uncertainly between laughter and tears. Set in South Africa in the usual bummer future — yet again, it’s man against man, as well as machine — the movie imagines a scenario in which tin-can police march in lock step with their human analogues to roust the usual tattooed and dreadlocked gun-toting degenerates. All the aerial shots of the dangerously swarming and swelling multitudes suggest that such draconian tactics are necessary.The director Given the big studio way, it’s no surprise that the robots, with their matte gray cladding and rabbit ears, swiveling heads and articulated limbs, have been created with more attention to detail than the story. After the preliminaries, a protagonist emerges in the person of Deon (A scene from the film.Things go wrong like genre clockwork, and Chappie ends up in the hands of a troika of misfit criminals who decide that a smart robot would make a useful accessory to go with their pink and yellow guns, which look as finger-licking good as Valentine’s candy. The South African musicians Ninja (the guy) and Yo-Landi Visser (the woman), bring the cartoon charisma as the flashiest two thirds of this trio, with the American actor Jose Pablo Cantillo, as Yankie, valiantly thumping along as the third wheel. A well-greased matched set, Yo-Landi Visser and Ninja (the characters share the performers’ names), take to Chappie-rearing seriously and soon teach the robot how to talk, shoot and stroll like a gangsta while he, in turn, takes jerky baby steps and calls them Mommy and Daddy.It’s a goof, as is so much of “Chappie” despite the violence, crenelated brows and choreographed grimaces. For all of Mr. Blomkamp’s attention to grim speculative fiction and its trappings (the despair, the gadgets), he often seems more at ease when things are going right for his characters or when he’s lobbing a joke. Sometimes he uses comedy as a distraction or to soft-pedal an emotion or an idea. It’s funny when Chappie watches the cartoon “He-Man and the Masters of the Universe,” because you see him learning, but the scene also gestures to the idea that hyperbolic masculinity is absurd learned behavior. And when Yo-Landi reads a children’s book or chatters sweetly to Chappie, something rather more surprising happens because Mr. Blomkamp has let real emotions creep in, too.Mr. Blomkamp may be genuinely interested in artificial intelligence, but he doesn’t engage with it (as, say, Steven Spielberg did in “A.I.”) as much as desultorily kick it around. It’s as if he felt that he needed an excuse to trot out his robot, as if one were ever needed. It’s no wonder his nods to earlier texts — from the different iterations of “Frankenstein” to “RoboCop” — register as little more than shorthand for ideas that have been worked out more fully elsewhere. In some movies, allusions to other movies build on earlier thinking or, at times, become an index of authorial self-regard, intended mostly to close the distance between the original and the copy. Here, the allusions feel like the handiwork of someone who’s eager to make something cool and so borrows with promiscuous abandon.This is Mr. Blomkamp’s third feature, and he’s still finding his way as a director; again and again, as in the past, he struggles with the material, a performance, an idea, the tone or just some blocking. “Chappie” is more visibly modest and less narratively ambitious than his last movie, “Elysium,” which benefited greatly from Matt Damon’s emotionally anchoring star turn as an Everyman struggling among the human-made ruins. Scaling down has its drawbacks, as some of the visible digital artifacts in “Chappie” make clear. Yet even at his shakiest, Mr. Blomkamp holds your attention with stories about characters banding together to emerge from a hell not of their own making, a liberation journey that just isn’t the same old, same old when a director was born in South Africa.“Chappie” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Relentless gun violence. 





A version of this review appears in print on March 6, 2015, on Page C9 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;