Mission: Impossible - Rogue Nation
7.4
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISWatching The first “Mission: Impossible” movie, a spinoff from the 1960s television show, was released 19 years ago and was, though it’s almost hard to believe it now, something of an auteurist event, having been directed by Brian De Palma. Mr. Cruise was an established action star by 1996, but he also helped produce the first film, which strengthened his status as an international brand. As a star-auteur, he has always been the most important feature and effect of the series, although it’s telling that Mr. De Palma oversaw the set-piece that gave the movies their foundational image: Mr. Cruise’s operative, Ethan Hunt, As the clock tick-tocks, and Ethan struggles to keep his cool — a single drop of sweat splashed on the floor would blow the operation — the visual gloss and high-tech gobbledygook, Mr. Cruise’s graceful athleticism and Mr. De Palma’s New Hollywood suspense chops flow together, turning the scene into the emblematic “Mission: Impossible” showstopper. It’s the kind of pure cine-spectacle that jolts you before sweeping you up. There’s never been a scene in the series as memorable as that one, even if the exploding fish tank, the film’s other eye-popper, comes close. These sequences set a high bar both for directors who followed in Mr. De Palma’s wake and for Mr. Cruise’s physical performance, which in the later installments has largely involved progressively scarier stunts.The writer and director of the latest movie — its goofy full title is “Mission: Impossible — Rogue Nation” — is Sleek and bloated, specific and generic, “Rogue Nation” is pretty much like most of the “Impossible” movies in that it’s an immense machine that Mr. McQuarrie, after tinkering and oiling, has cranked up again and set humming with twists and turns, global trotting and gadgets, a crack supporting cast and a hard-working star. Christopher McQuarrie narrates a sequence from “Mission: Impossible — Rogue Nation,” starring Tom Cruise.Mr. Cruise looks comfortable with Ms. Ferguson, another plus. For most of his action-movie career, he has come across as a less romantically nimble, less self-amused version of The Times critic Manohla Dargis reviews “Mission: Impossible — Rogue Nation.”That helps speed up “Rogue Nation,” which slows down when the plot tangles or some ceremonial manly peacocking ensues, usually from Mr. Renner and Mr. Cruise. Clearly Mr. McQuarrie and his star feel the need to stamp the series with seriousness, something that Mr. De Palma knew better than to do. And throughout “Rogue Nation,” you can sense the filmmakers comfortably, at times awkwardly, playing tug of war with the mood, which grows sinister with the excellent Sean Harris as the regulation evil genius and almost frisky with Alec Baldwin as an intelligence blowhard and Tom Hollander as a political boob. Mr. Pegg’s second-banana flair is especially crucial here because it helps show that Mr. Cruise, whose smile at times seems awfully strained these days, can still take a ribbing as well as a licking.“Mission: Impossible — Rogue Nation” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Kids, don’t try this at home.





A version of this review appears in print on July 31, 2015, on Page C6 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;