Ant-Man
7.4
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTI wish I could assure you that no insects were harmed in the writing of this review, but that would be a lie.The ants who are regular summer visitors to my kitchen have lately been sending scouts into the study. One just crawled across my laptop screen, and as I crushed its tiny body between my thumb and forefinger, an alarming thought crossed my mind: They know what I’m up to. Ants are highly intelligent creatures (at least collectively), and are famous for their determination and commitment. Here I was, about to pass judgment on one of their rare forays into popular culture, and here they were, checking up on me.
                Mr. Rudd is playing one of the tiniest superheroes ever seen on screen, but he’s impressed by ants’ skills and variety.            But to what end? Were they sniffing out bad press in advance, or trying to warn an honest journalist that their species was terribly misrepresented by “Ant-Man”? In my thoughtless, murderous haste, I hadn’t bothered to ask, or to check my victim for a Marvel logo tattooed on its thorax.So someone else will have to tackle the hot topic of “What ‘Ant-Man’ Gets Wrong About Ants.” Directed by the comedy specialist Peyton Reed (“The Times critic A.O. Scott reviews “Ant-Man.”It’s an origin story, which is too bad, but at least relieves a reviewer of tedious explanatory duties. The background is that a brilliant scientist, Dr. Hank Pym (AdvertisementBut look at the time! Spoiler alert. OMG and LOL — not so much of the first (unless you are still astonished by the sight of guys in mechanical suits punching each other), but a decent dose of the second. This is mostly thanks to Biochemist Dr. Hank Pym creates a size-altering formula. He tests it on himself and manages to shrink himself down to the size of an ant.And Mr. Rudd? Well, it’s funny. What I mean is that he isn’t very funny, which is strange, given his track record in ensemble comedies. He’s a pleasant enough hero, registering confusion, amazement and irritation when circumstances require them, but his special charisma gets lost in the suit and drowned out in the hectic noise of the plot.Ants are not known for individualism, which makes them, in some ways, a less promising platform for superheroism than spiders or bats. When Scott summons swarms of six-legged allies, the effect is underwhelming. But Mr. Reed does exploit two important (if obvious) ant characteristics: strength and tininess. Scott’s Ant-Man suit allows him to change size instantly, which adds novelty to some of the fight scenes (notably one with Falcon, an Avenger played by The most ingenious sequence comes near the end, during a climactic battle between two miniaturized dudes, which toggles between their perspective and that of normal-size people. What appears to the combatants to be a noisy, screen-filling, no-holds-barred struggle looks, at human scale, like a minor disturbance in a room full of toys. Perhaps this is a metaphor: Trapped inside this big movie is a small one, trying to get out.“Ant-Man” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Squish.





A version of this review appears in print on July 17, 2015, on Page C8 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;