Atonement
7.8
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTJoe Wright’s   Two characters make significant use of a typewriter — one is an aspiring playwright, the other a yearning rural swain — but the sound of the machine is co-opted by Dario Marianelli, who wrote the movie’s score and who conjoins the clack-clacking of mechanical composition with the steady plink of a repeated piano note. At a climactic moment  Brenda Blethyn, who can be as subtle an actress as Mr. Marianelli is a composer, leaps screaming from the darkness and begins beating on the hood of a car with an umbrella, a tocsin that joins the plink and the clack in a small symphony of literal-minded irrelevance.That pretty much describes the rest of “Atonement,”  piously rendered by the screenwriter Christopher Hampton from Ian McEwan’s novel. This is not a bad literary adaptation; it is too handsomely shot and Britishly acted to warrant such strong condemnation. “Atonement” is, instead, an almost classical example of how pointless, how diminishing, the transmutation of literature into film can be. The respect that Mr. Wright and Mr. Hampton show to Mr. McEwan is no doubt gratifying to him, but it is fatal to their own project.Unlike Mr. Wright’s brisk, romantic film version of Jane Austen’s AdvertisementKeira Knightley, who also starred in “Pride and Prejudice,” plays Cecilia Tallis, a rich girl who discovers she is loved by and in love with Robbie (James McAvoy), the son of one of her family’s servants. Their furtive, ardent courtship is observed by Cecilia’s younger sister, Briony (played at 13 by the remarkably poised Saoirse Ronan  —  pronounced SEER-Sha), whose combination of precocity and confusion precipitates a household catastrophe.AdvertisementA bigger one arrives in the form of World War II, and it is here, in the transition from hothouse psychodrama to historical pseudo-epic, that “Atonement” runs aground, losing dramatic coherence and intellectual focus. Romola Garai has taken over the role of Briony (in a coda, she will age gracefully into Vanessa Redgrave), who  works as a nurse in London. Cecilia, now estranged from the family, does similar duty, and Robbie stumbles toward the beach at Dunkirk.There are some powerful images — of scared and tired soldiers in  France, of bloody wounds and shattered limbs in London — but the film’s treatment of the war has a detached, secondhand feeling. And even the most impressive sequences have an empty, arty virtuosity. The impression left by a long, complicated battlefield tracking shot is pretty much “Wow, that’s quite a tracking shot,” when it should be “My God, what a horrible experience that must have been.”The main casualty of the film’s long, murky middle and end sections is the big moral theme  — and also the ingenious formal gimmick —   that provides the book with some of its intensity and much of its cachet. As the title suggests, “Atonement” is fundamentally about guilt and the attempt to overcome it, and about the tricky, tragically imperfect power of art to compensate for real-life crimes and misdemeanors.Without giving too much away, I will say that the power of the story depends on its believability, on the audience’s ability to perceive Robbie and Cecilia in wartime as suffering, flesh-and-blood creatures. Mr. McAvoy and Ms. Knightley sigh and swoon credibly enough, but they are stymied by the inertia of the filmmaking, and by the film’s failure to find a strong connection between the fates of the characters and the ideas and historical events that swirl around them.“Atonement” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has sexual situations and graphic combat violence. ATONEMENTOpens today in New York and Los Angeles. Directed by Joe Wright; written by Christopher Hampton, based on the novel by Ian McEwan; director of photography, Seamus McGarvey; edited by Paul Tothill; music by Dario Marianelli; production designer, Sarah Greenwood; produced by Tim Bevan, Eric Fellner and Paul Webster; released by Focus Features. Running time: 2 hours 3 minutes.WITH: James McAvoy (Robbie Turner), Keira Knightley (Cecilia Tallis), Romola Garai (Briony Tallis at 18), Saoirse  Ronan (Briony at 13) ,  Vanessa Redgrave (Older Briony) and Brenda Blethyn (Grace Turner).





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page E1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;