Shooter
7.2
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISMuscles bulge and heads explode in The late 1980s and 1990s were good times for big movie bangs and bulging movie muscle. It was the golden age of bad boys and Boy Scouts, wisecracks and careless, loving, hardcore American violence. Sept. 11 may have dampened our appetite for destruction, and I know that I squirmed uncomfortably while watching The story has the simplicity of a fairy tale: A former military sniper, Bob Lee Swagger (Mark Wahlberg), having opted out of the Marines after an unfortunate escapade abroad, has retreated into the deep woods with his dog and his guns. An updated, upgraded Jeremiah Johnson, with a garden full of vegetables and a fridge stocked with beer, Swagger comes across as something of a Zen mountain man. He lives simply (but has a computer) and dresses plainly (but wears a trendsetter’s beard). He seems at peace in this world as he sits on a crest overlooking the forest. Yet the world is not at peace, as we know from the first few minutes of the film set someplace dusty and scary and far, far away.Guns must be raised, and that beard really has to come off. And so they do and so it does, as Swagger comes down off his mountain and drops into an assassination intrigue stocked with villainy and weapons. There are black helicopters, a spunky redhead (Kate Mara) and a shootout boldly painted in red, white and blue. The redhead looks good in a miniskirt and twirls a rifle as lightly as a baton; mostly she ogles Mr. Wahlberg, who, once he shaves his beard, provides ample opportunity for eyeball strain. A natural screen presence, Mr. Wahlberg is charmingly sincere (he’s like a cruder, more street Matt Damon), though when he sheds his clothes the glint in his eyes is as knowing as that of an old Vegas stripper.AdvertisementDirected by AdvertisementHere that disorder extends to the story, which combines a live-free-or-die vibe with some deep-fried gun-and-flag fetishism for the usual love-it-or-leave-it, lock-and-load, make-my-day Hollywood jumble. Bob Lee Swagger’s name is obviously meant to evoke Lee Harvey Oswald, much like the image of a rifle pointed in the direction of an American president. But it’s tough to figure out how these historically saturated allusions to the Kennedy assassination fit with the angry talk about Congress. In the end all we know about Bob Lee Swagger is that, like the adorable “Shooter” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Did I mention the exploding heads?SHOOTER Opens today nationwide. Directed by WITH: Mark Wahlberg (Bob Lee Swagger), Michael Peña (Nick Memphis), Danny Glover (Col. Isaac Johnson), Kate Mara (Sarah Fenn), Elias Koteas (Jack Payne), Rhona Mitra (Alourdes Galindo), Rade Sherbedgia (Michael Sandor) and Ned Beatty (Senator Charles F. Meachum).





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page E12 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;