Looper
7.4
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe writer and director of “Looper” discusses elements of his time-travel thriller.“Looper,”The ostensible reason for Mr. Gordon-Levitt’s extreme makeover is that he and Mr. Willis are playing the same contract killer, Joe, at different ages. A looper, the young Joe works for an outfit that exists 30 years beyond 2044, where time travel exists but is illegal. Whenever the outfit wants to dispose of a “problem,” it sends the problem with a hood over his head into the past where a looper is waiting with a gun to blow him to smithereens. The hook — you can almost hear the original movie pitch it’s so tidy — is that every so often the outfit sends back an older looper, who’s unknowingly killed by his younger self, which is how the 2044 Joe stares down his middle-aged counterpart.It isn’t a happy meeting, but the writer and director It’s a juicy premise, ripe for the squeezing, though it takes a while to get over Joe’s looking less like a young Mr. Willis and more like Keanu Reeves with a dash of Marlon Brando doing Japanese minstrel for “There’s a lot to get past, including an antediluvian divide between hard-charging men and decorative dames, including a stripper, Suzie (Piper Perabo), who works at a club called La Belle Aurore, the name of the Paris joint where Humphrey Bogart once met Ingrid Bergman. As time goes by, indeed, or as Mr. Johnson prefers, loops the loop. (Using some metaphysical shorthand he also alludes to the “Looper” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Lots of gun deaths.





A film review on Friday about &#8220;Looper&#8221; misstated the year in which the movie is set. It is 2044, not 2074. Thus the young Joe works for an outfit that exists 30 years beyond 2044, not beyond 2074, and it is the 2044 Joe, not the 2074 Joe, who stares down his middle-aged counterpart.A version of this review appears in print on September 28, 2012, on Page C6 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;