Everest
7.1
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTT“Because it’s there” is a perfectly valid justification for climbing an enormous mountain — a In theory, the stakes should be high and the drama intense, as human beings battle the brute forces of nature in a life-or-death struggle. But though it assembles a first-rate cast in a story taken from reality, “Everest” feels icebound and strangely abstract, lacking the gravity of genuine tragedy or the swagger of first-rate adventure.
                To make it real, filmmakers contended with freezing temperatures, thin air and avalanches.            This may be partly because one of the film’s themes is the commodification of adventure, the colonization of a wild and dangerous terrestrial spot by tourists and thrill seekers. The individual climbers who receive most of our attention are treated with empathy and respect — the Westerners, that is; the Nepalese Sherpas who guide and assist them barely figure at all — but Everest itself is a mob scene. The feeling of discovery, of primal wonder at the inhuman sublimity of the mountain, has been compromised. People with a lot of money and little climbing experience turn the base camp into a virtual trailer park and litter the upper slopes with discarded ropes, flags and oxygen tanks. Professional tour leaders are expected to ensure the safety of clients who insist on pushing toward the summit despite potentially fatal risks.“Everest” turns partly on the rivalry between two seasoned climbers: Rob Hall, a stoic, disciplined New Zealander played by the ever-solid Jason Clarke; and Scott Fischer, a gonzo American played with marvelous mischief by Two different expeditions are challenged beyond their limits by one of the fiercest snowstorms ever encountered by mankind in an attempt to reach the summit of the world’s highest mountain.This movie, written by William Nicholson and Simon Beaufoy, tells a somewhat different version of the story, with Mr. Krakauer (Michael Kelly) as a marginal and not entirely sympathetic character. His participation in the climb as a writer working on an article for Outside magazine is part of the competition between Hall and Fischer. Both climbers crave the publicity a magazine feature would bring, even though Hall is also aware that such attention is contributing to dangerous and unpleasant conditions on the mountain.AdvertisementAt one point, Krakauer asks members of Hall’s expedition why they are there, and though their answers are potted or evasive, “Everest” fills in some of the blanks. Beck Weathers, a gung-ho Texan played by Mr. Kormakur, an Icelandic director whose films include “Jar City” and “2 Guns,” hits his stride once the preliminary conversations and expository scenes give way to practical decisions and perilous mishaps. As his camera swoops down on the climbers from above — and, on a few vertiginous occasions, from below — you feel some of the grandeur and terror of their undertaking. They are small, slow-moving creatures, their bright-colored gear vivid and incongruous amid the sparkling whites and swirling grays of snow, cloud and wind. Their progress is grueling and slow, but Mr. Kormakur generates suspense through deft crosscutting and an accelerating sense of doom.AdvertisementDown at the base camp, Helen Wilton (Emily Watson), Hall’s business partner and a kind of den mother to his clients, keeps an eye on the weather and an ear on her two-way radio. From time to time, we peek in on Hall’s wife, Jan Arnold (In telling its terrible true story, “Everest” gets stuck between celebrating the indomitability of the human spirit and reckoning with the awful consequences of hubris and bad luck. It aspires to something large and lofty, but in the end it’s a big pile of rocks, ice and vain and valiant human effort.“Everest” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Meteorological brutality.





A version of this review appears in print on September 18, 2015, on Page C13 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;