My Sister's Keeper
7.4
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTThe prospect of a child’s death is so awful that to broach it in a movie or a book requires a special measure of caution and sensitivity. Or so you might think. But at least since Victorian novelists from Charles Dickens to Louisa May Alcott dispatched under-age angels to heaven on cataracts of tears, dead or dying kids have provided ready catharsis and money in the bank. In modern day commercial fiction, and in Hollywood movies, childhood mortality is handled with sometimes cynical care. It can authorize righteous, vengeful violence or else reawaken the dormant possibilities of melodrama. Nothing else quite guarantees the same queasy intensity of feeling.“My Sister’s Keeper,” based on a best-selling novel by Jodi Picoult, is an unapologetic — shameless? ruthless? — weepie, exploiting the grave illness of a lovely, lively, blameless girl from start to finish. But it has ambitions beyond mere ghoulish mawkishness. The director, In this film, he assembles an able cast into a family defined and distorted by the leukemia of their older daughter and middle child, Kate (Sofia Vassilieva). Kate’s disease was diagnosed when she was a toddler, and to save her life her parents, Sara (In the present, Anna has engaged a lawyer — a marvelously florid AdvertisementHer suit raises some interesting ethical and legal issues, which are passed over rather lightly as the case comes before a judge (But ethics are secondary to psychology, which is explored with varying degrees of superficiality and plausibility. Ms. Diaz is entirely believable as an ambitious, tough-minded woman whose ferocious protectiveness makes her at once heroic and a little monstrous, and Ms. Breslin and Ms. Vassilieva both nimbly navigate tricky roles, finding a vein of humor that undercuts some of the maudlin moments and adds to the emotional impact of the story.Which is a bit too firmly wired into the premise. Mr. Cassavetes, who wrote the script with Jeremy Leven, has changed some  details of Ms. Picoult’s novel, in particular by taking out a grotesquely shocking plot twist and replacing it with one that is mildly surprising, even as it reveals some of the film’s themes to be red herrings.AdvertisementOther themes are less clearly considered than they might have been. At times, “My Sister’s Keeper” manages to be quietly insightful. A touching subplot, traced in a long, patient flashback, about a romance between Kate and a young fellow cancer patient (Thomas Dekker) is one of the few extended passages in the film that have some of the fine grain of lived experience. In general, though, Mr. Cassavetes writes in the shorthand of sentimentality rather than the prose of real feeling, relying on montage sequences, blackout cuts, the mellow golden hues of Caleb Deschanel’s cinematography and a heart-tweaking musical soundtrack as a substitute for hard dramatic work.The tears arrive on cue, and to the extent that Ms. Vassilieva has embodied an authentic adolescent rather than a symbol of suffering, they are earned. But the film cannot quite decide what to make of the Fitzgerald family tragedy. It tries, to some extent, to resist the temptation to spiritualize Kate by finding meaning or comfort in her terrible situation even as it succumbs, in the end, to creepy and unconvincing redemptive impulses. “My Sister’s Keeper” takes on a very tough subject — and has, in Anna and Kate, two pretty tough characters played by strong young actresses — but ultimately it is too soft, too easy, and it dissolves like a tear-soaked tissue.“My Sister’s Keeper” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has some under-age misbehavior, occasional strong language and some upsetting hospital scenes.MY SISTER’S KEEPEROpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page C6 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;