Grown Ups 2
5.4
AdvertisementBy ANDY WEBSTER“The party’s over, fellas,” says As often happens in follow-ups to hit movies, connective logic flies out the window: Lenny and his family have now left Los Angeles for his New England hometown, and his friends — girthy Eric (Kevin James), henpecked Kurt (Chris Rock) and randy, single Marcus (David Spade) — seem to have moved onto the block. Three are joined by their wives (portrayed by Salma Hayek, Maria Bello and Maya Rudolph, all talented performers slumming here). The “SNL” parade continues with Jon Lovitz, Tim Meadows and Colin Quinn in smaller parts. (Playing a pronounced corporate supporting role: Kmart.)There are numerous plot threads, woven haphazardly. Mr. Spade’s character meets his son, a delinquent raised by a distant ex; Mr. Sandler’s objects to his wife’s desire for another child; Mr. James’s feels ignored by his spouse; and Mr. Rock’s has earned a “get out of jail free” pass from his missis for a day because he remembered their 20th anniversary. Husbands, you see, are oppressed; wives are demanding.Oh, a gang of fraternity lunks threatens the boys for daring to swim in their cherished childhood quarry lake. When Lenny throws an ’80s-themed costume party (pop goes the nostalgia!), the Greeks invade, and a free-for-all commences in which age battles callow youth and townies fight collegians (dubious class warfare conducted on Lenny’s expansive property). For humor, there is flatulence and urination (favored motifs from the first installment), belching, vomiting, simulated defecation, abundant leering and jokes about mannish women and feminine men.This is pap, plain and simple: scattered raunch-lite devoid of emotional resonance. At best, it sells itself on the spectacle of a TV show’s cast reunion — and even then it disappoints. With the debacles of “Grown Ups 2” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Bikinis and bodily functions. 





A version of this review appears in print on July 12, 2013, on Page C11 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;