Nightcrawler
7.9
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTThe writer and director Dan Gilroy narrates a sequence from “Nightcrawler,” featuring Jake Gyllenhaal and Rene Russo.Lou Bloom, the title character of Adrift in a violent and gloomy Los Angeles, where he lives alone in a small apartment, Lou hatches an ambition that quickly blossoms into an obsession. Learning that local television stations will pay good money for video of accidents, fires and crime scenes — the bloodier, the better — he sets out to corner the market. With a police scanner and a cheap video camera, he speeds through the nighttime streets, looking for horrible images he can sell.The Times critic A. O. Scott reviews “Nightcrawler.”In another sense, Lou aspires to be something much grander than a purveyor of grisly footage for the evening news. His dream — or rather the dream of Dan Gilroy, the writer and director of “Nightcrawler,” and perhaps of Mr. Gyllenhaal as well — is to join the ranks of Travis Bickle and But a creepy disposition does not an antihero make, and “Nightcrawler” never attains anywhere near the gravity or the impact of Really, though, the chasing after important themes is a distraction. “Nightcrawler” is a modest and effectively executed urban thriller, suspenseful and entertaining in its clammy, overwrought way. Mr. Gyllenhaal’s performance, while not remotely persuasive, is disciplined and meticulous in its creepiness, and Mr. Gilroy keeps the audience off balance, fascinated and repelled, half rooting for Lou to succeed, and half dreading what he will do next.As his business starts to grow, Lou tangles with rivals and hires a wide-eyed sidekick (Riz Ahmed), all the while explaining himself in the jargon of management and self-help. He is a fast learner, and his amoral zeal causes him to evolve from eager voyeur into something much worse. His earnest belief in himself is both funny and dismaying, and his complete indifference to ethical boundaries makes for some slightly guilty fun. But nothing much beyond that. “Nightcrawler” is a slick and shallow movie desperate, like Lou himself, to be something more.Advertisement“Nightcrawler” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Graphic violence and ugly language.





A listing of credits on Oct. 31 with a film review of &ldquo;Nightcrawler&rdquo; misidentified the distributor. It is Open Road Films, not Roadside Attractions.A version of this review appears in print on October 31, 2014, on Page C10 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;