Miss Sloane
5.5
AdvertisementBy STEPHEN HOLDENJessica ChastainWith her heavily applied crimson lipstick, copper hair and pallid complexion, Elizabeth is beautiful but scary. She’s just one step away from a bloodless cousin of Morticia Addams. The story then jumps two years back, and Elizabeth is shown testifying before a Senate subcommittee. Questioned about breaking ethical rules by arranging a trip for a senator to Indonesia to research the feasibility of a tariff on palm oil, she repeatedly invokes the Fifth Amendment.The tone of the interrogation is so nasty that the film, directed by A preview of the film.The palm-oil brouhaha illustrates the savage, self-righteous tone of political warfare in a movie without an iota of humor. In Mr. Perera’s long-winded screenplay, the characters tend to give little speeches instead of conversing normally. Some of the wordplay may be clever, but the attempts at witty repartee aren’t sharp enough to be remotely amusing.We learn early in the film that Elizabeth lives on little sleep and relies on a roller coaster regimen of uppers and downers. Outside of work, she has no personal life. Her needs for intimacy are met by studly male escorts, one of whom, Forde (Jake Lacy), becomes a regular. And as the interrogation led by a scowling senior senator (John Lithgow) continues, Forde is called to testify.AdvertisementElizabeth is as chilly and enigmatic as Maya, the C.I.A. analyst Ms. Chastain played in “Zero Dark Thirty,” but with an added streak of ferocity. When under siege, she doesn’t disguise her arrogance and contempt, and she bullies underlings.But Elizabeth is not entirely unprincipled. When she and her colleagues at the Cole, Kravitz &amp; Waterman consulting firm are approached by a National Rifle Association-like organization and asked to devise a campaign to make gun ownership more appealing to women, Elizabeth demurs. Having changed her views on gun ownership “somewhere between Columbine and Charleston,” she now supports background checks for gun buyers. To the fury of her boss (Despite her principles, you still have the uncomfortable feeling that winning a fight matters much more to Elizabeth than the issues involved. She thinks nothing of betraying a friend if it advances her cause. She pressures the film’s most sympathetic character, Esme Manucharian (Gugu Mbatha-Raw), a victim of gun violence, to tell her story on television.Partly because ““Miss Sloane” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has strong language and sexual situations. Running time: 2 hours 12 minutes.





A version of this review appears in print on November 25, 2016, on Page C5 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;