The Divergent Series: Insurgent
6.1
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe Times critic Manohla Dargis reviews “The Divergent Series: Insurgent.”Tighter, tougher and every bit as witless as its predecessor, “The Divergent Series: Insurgent” — the second segment in the cycle — arrives with a yawn and ends with a bang. In between, bodies run, leap and fall amid nuzzling lips, blasting bullets and periodic story turns that make the movie a modest cultural artifact if one largely devoid of aesthetic interest. At this point, the heroine, Tris Prior (Shailene Woodley), can easily lock and load, having been trained by a thuggishly stylish faction, Dauntless, whose members wear the usual blah-blah black, tats and piercings and guard this dystopian world. “They’re our protectors, our soldiers, our police,” Tris says of them in the first movie, if also “crazy.”For Tris, the filmmakers and those who have embraced this franchise, that’s probably, you know, cool. As the Wachowskis proved in the “Matrix” trilogy and as copycat moviemakers have been affirming since, jackboot fashion and heroic hyperviolence go together in movies like guns and ammunition. And while guns may be a hot-button topic off-screen, they remain blandly par for the action-movie course, including in PG-13-rated movies like this. So much so that “Insurgent,” based on the young-adult series by Veronica Roth, features not one but two scenes in which a nominal villain is executed point blank with a bullet to the head by a nominally righteous character.The director The story takes place in a post-apocalypse walled Chicago largely peopled by five multiracial factions. At 16, its citizens partake in an initiation ritual, the Choosing Ceremony, in which, like AdvertisementThe idea that life comes down to personality is a reassuring fantasy, perhaps especially for readers struggling to find their own paths and selves amid the confusions of adolescence. Ms. Roth’s A scene from the film.That said, Tris still isn’t all that engaging, even if she remains an effective empathy generator despite her occasional need to shoot to kill. She feels bad about that, mind you, shedding tears now and then amid the mayhem and exegesis. In broad strokes, Tris is the classic odd girl out and compulsory self-reliant heroine who leads with her brains instead of her inevitable good looks, the protagonist who struggles to feel she belongs even though she was born to lead. Sometimes she’s called Joan as in Arc; in “The Hunger Games,” the obvious model for the “Divergent” book series, she’s called Katniss Everdeen. Although Tris isn’t Katniss, not exactly, the characters face similar hurdles, including securing the future of their people and negotiating the attention of their romantic foils.AdvertisementThere’s a little smooching in “Insurgent,” most conspicuously when Tris unzips to get down and tastefully dirty with her boyfriend, Four (Theo James). Like Tris, Four is a renegade with a secret that’s revealed in this installment and leads to the introduction of a new character, Evelyn, played by the always welcome Naomi Watts. Like most big-ticket screen franchises, this one comes with some actual acting talent that gives the movie tang and legitimacy and may also help broaden its appeal along with its marketing and publicity opportunities. Performers like Ms. Watts and her co-star, Kate Winslet, who plays Jeanine, one of the baddies in the series, also provide a much-needed counterweight for the interchangeable young lovelies floating in the background.The standout among the younger performers is Miles Teller, whose to-the-screen-born poise and controlled nervous energy make a jolting contrast to the pouts and droopiness of some of the other secondary male leads. Mr. Teller plays Peter, a Dauntless member who turns up every so often to help push the story forward and throw some barbs at Tris. Mr. James has obvious charms, but together he and Ms. Woodley work like a palliative on the movie. A somewhat appealingly diffident presence, Ms. Woodley has a talent for carving out a little pocket of intimacy on-screen, which is why she’s good at bringing you into a character’s head space. She too has appeal, though it’s clear that, even after two movies, she isn’t as much driving this franchise as catching a ride.“The Divergent Series: Insurgent” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Extreme if generally bloodless, gutless violence.





A version of this review appears in print on March 20, 2015, on Page C8 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;