The Other Boleyn Girl
6.7
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISMore slog than romp, According to this oddly plotted and frantically paced pastiche — written by Peter Morgan, directed by Justin Chadwick — the girls were more or less the Paris and Nicky Hilton of the Tudor court. In the film’s version of the Boleyn family saga, based on the novel by Philippa Gregory of the same title, they were pimped out by their scheming, ambitious father, Sir Thomas (a spidery Mark Rylance), who sought to advance the family on the backs of his daughters while Mrs. Sir Thomas  (Kristin Scott Thomas) clucked darkly from the sidelines. Forced to compete for kingly favors, the women were soon rivals, a contest that, in its few meagerly entertaining moments, recalls the sisterly love in The story of Anne Boleyn may sound as if it’s been cut from classier cloth than that delirious Robert Aldrich film, but history tells a juicier story. One of Anne’s biographers, Joanna Denny, writes that while at the French court Mary got around (she was “passed on from man to man”),  which I don’t remember from high school or public television. Instead of letting the story rip, though, the film plays it safe and predictable by dividing the sisters into the bad brunette and gentle blonde, thereby displacing the courtly intrigue onto two warring women. The Boleyn sisters were the kind of trouble that can make for bodice-ripping entertainment, but they were also the kind of unruly women who sometimes risked burning.Anne faced the sword, not the stake, but that’s jumping ahead of this story and its galloping horses, bustling  gowns and rampaging royals. It’s a marvel that something that feels so inert should have so much frenetic action. Shot in high-definition video with a murky brown palette (perhaps to suggest tea-stained porcelain and teeth), the film is both underwritten and overedited. Many of the scenes seem to have been whittled down to the nub, which at times turns it into a succession of wordless gestures and poses. Given the generally risible dialogue, this isn’t a bad thing, despite Mr. Morgan’s previous credits (notably “The Other Boleyn Girl” has been rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Roving hands, rolling heads. THE OTHER BOLEYN GIRLOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by Justin Chadwick; written by Peter Morgan, based on the novel by Philippa Gregory; director of photography, Kieran McGuigan; edited by Paul Knight and Carol Littleton; music by Paul Cantelon; production designer, John-Paul Kelly; produced by Alison Owen; released by Columbia Pictures and Focus Features. Running time: 1 hour 55 minutes.AdvertisementWITH: Natalie Portman (Anne Boleyn), Scarlett Johansson (Mary Boleyn), Eric Bana (Henry VIII), Kristin Scott Thomas (Lady Elizabeth Boleyn), Mark Rylance (Thomas Boleyn), David Morrissey (Duke of Norfolk),  Jim Sturgess (George Boleyn) and Ana Torrent (Catherine of Aragon).





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page E17 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;