Letters to Juliet
6.5
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTT“Letters to Juliet”The people in tragedies, according to Aristotle, are better than the rest of us, while the people in comedies are worse. In a certain kind of modern comic romance, though, the two primary  stipulations are that the main characters be better-looking and duller than the audience, which produces a self-canceling wash of emotions. No cathartic tears or therapeutic laughter, but instead a mild, smiley stupefaction. Look at how pretty Italy is! And how pretty Actually, the old lady — her name is Claire, and she’s played by the effortlessly marvelous Ms. Seyfried’s character, Sophie — who checks facts at a version of The New Yorker edited by Oliver Platt from an office with a view of the Brooklyn Bridge — arrives in Verona on a prenuptial kind-of-honeymoon with her fiancé, Victor (AdvertisementSophie and Victor are passionate young people, but just not about each other. She wants to write, he’s about to open a restaurant, and their blissful Italian sojourn turns into a model of the stressed-out, competitive metropolitan marriage that would surely follow. (Not that there’s any real danger of that.) They chat and text each other, but mostly go their separate ways — “win-win,” as Victor puts it — he to hunt down culinary delicacies, she to chase after a story that turns out to be Claire’s.AdvertisementFirst, though, Sophie happens upon a group of Italian women known as Juliet’s secretaries, who gather the letters that lovelorn ladies from around the world have tucked between the stones of a wall under the most famous balcony in Verona, opening their hearts to love’s great martyr. Each petitioner receives a reply, and Sophie decides to answer a melancholy note that has been languishing there for half a century. Its author was Claire, a British exchange student who was supposed to meet a local beau named Lorenzo, but then succumbed to cold feet and went back to England.Now, lured by the response that Sophie has written, Claire is back in Verona, along with a handsome blond grandson named Charlie (Christopher Egan, basically For much of its running time, “Letters to Juliet” is content to provide touristic evidence that Italy exists: hillsides bathed in golden light; steep and stony little towns; tile roofs and gently sloping vineyards. The human scenery suggests that time stopped sometime after Shakespeare but long before Berlusconi, and that Italy’s authentic cultural role is as a colorful background for Anglophone romance.That conceit worked reasonably well for Henry James and E. M. Forster, whose august shadows occasionally fall over this sunny and superficial trifle. Ms. Seyfried shows some of the charm and verve of those authors’ expatriate heroines, and it is hard not to root for Sophie’s happiness, even as the film carefully spares her the risk of serious heartache.“Letters to Juliet” is the fourth movie Ms. Seyfried has appeared in this year, and it, along with the romantic weepie Which makes her, like Ms. Redgrave, a little more interesting than the movie she’s in. It’s not that “Letters to Juliet” is bad. If you want a bad romantic comedy, I can give you a long list. But being able to like a movie of this kind is a form of disappointment, since what you want — what you are promised — is love.“Letters to Juliet” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested.)  Sex is occasionally implied. LETTERS TO JULIETOpens on Friday  nationwide. Directed by AdvertisementWITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on May 14, 2010, on Page C6 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;