Burnt
6.6
AdvertisementBy NEIL GENZLINGER“The film might have felt fresh and invigorating in, say, 1996. That’s when “The Times critic Neil Genzlinger reviews “Burnt.”And so pretty much everything in “For a time the movie feels like a heist film, as Adam calls his old kitchen gang together; one is even just getting out of prison. He insinuates himself into a restaurant owned by an old acquaintance (Daniel Brühl), who, in a side plot, is also in love with him. And he adds some new blood to his crew, most notably Helene (Sienna Miller).What follows is a decently structured story of personal demons and culinary competition, with a couple of nice twists thrown in, but it’s built with materials that at this point in the life cycle of this genre are mighty shopworn. Endless close-ups of artisanal plates of food fussily prepared. Frenetic kitchen scenes in which orders are shouted and pans sizzle. And, of course, frequent dish-smashing tantrums and tirades by Adam, because all master chefs are petulant, abusive jerks, aren’t they?A chef who loses his highly rated restaurant in France tries to mount a comeback in London by re-assembling his team.The kitchen-tyrant character may have a fair number of real-life counterparts, but it has become a cliché because it is practically the only version of this occupation that we ever see on television or in the movies. Surely there are some benevolent, patient chefs out there, and if there aren’t, let’s stop glorifying kitchen bad boys. No kitchen worker deserves to be berated over one pinch too many of some spice, no matter how elegant the dish.“Burnt” has other flaws, like not giving Ms. Miller enough to do, but its main one is simply that at this point it’s hard to care about people who mistake a third Michelin star for the most important thing in life.“Burnt” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian), because when things heat up in the kitchen, curse words fly. Running time: 1 hour 40 minutes.





A version of this review appears in print on October 30, 2015, on Page C10 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;