Whatever Works
7.2
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTStop me if you’ve heard this one: A guy walks into a meaningless universe. He sees this gorgeous blonde sitting at the bar. It’s obvious she’s never read a word of Dostoevsky, much less Kierkegaard. So he says to her, “Is it meaningless in here, or is it just me?,” and she says, “My place or yours?”I know, I know. It’s an old joke, and I didn’t tell it quite right. But that’s just my point. With material like this — a Jewish intellectual type shrugging his shoulders, looking into the camera, spitting out fancy Latinate words as if he’d just swallowed a thesaurus,  while an eager young actress of the moment flits around looks sultry and clueless — execution is everything. So my problem with Mr. Allen’s unwavering belief in an empty cosmos made somewhat less bleak by the charms of old movies, older music and much younger women is one of the few things left we can count on. If the man ever gets religion, then we will know we’re really in trouble. In recent years his hardy epicurean pessimism, temporarily transplanted to foreign soil, has yielded a sharply turned crime drama (But Mr. Allen’s imagination has returned to Manhattan after that invigorating European sojourn afflicted by an extreme case of jet lag. In spite of a few up-to-date references — to Barack Obama, red states and gay people, for instance — Mr. Allen seems to have touched down in New York at some hazy time when Zero Mostel, for whom “Whatever Works” was originally written, still ruled Broadway. Those kids, with their crazy rock ’n’ roll! Those artists, with their wacky ideas!AdvertisementThose women! As is often the case they save Mr. Allen (and his on-screen surrogate) from his worst instincts, even as his treatment of them exposes just how low and lazy those instincts can be. AdvertisementThe scenes, shot by the excellent Harris Savides, Gus Van Sant’s longtime director of photography, have a static, blocky feel. Their deliberate pacing and the decorous rhythms of the dialogue might charitably be described as classical, given the picture’s occasional evocation of a Broadway-to-Hollywood adaptation from the 1930s. A less generous word might be sloppy, given the near-total absence of the kind of Lubitschean verve of which Mr. Allen, when he’s on his comic game, is capable.To be sure there is a measure of vigor in Boris hectors the camera, his fellow performers and humans in general, most of whom he regards as “inchworms,” “pygmies” and other endearments, and offers the film’s title phrase as the summation of his cynical world view. But “whatever works” — by which he means, basically, do your own thing, “filch what happiness you can” in the absence of metaphysical order — could also be the slogan of pragmatism, a more optimistic philosophical disposition, and one that would deny Boris both his self-pity and his puffed-up sense of intellectual superiority.Without which there would not be much left, and nothing for Melody (Ms. Wood) to love. She is a homeless Southern waif who follows Boris home one rainy night and, despite his loudly and repeatedly professed lack of interest in her feelings, her opinions, her long legs or her short shorts, falls in love with him. After they marry, things become a bit more complicated, what with the unpredictable nature of desire and the necessity of eking out the hour and a half between opening titles and closing credits.Some of that time is spent in a kind of dinner-theater The punch line turns out to be that Manhattan is an island of relative bliss in the bleak and hostile universe, but the tolerant, upbeat note on which Boris ends his ranting is as unconvincing as his habitual dyspepsia. None of it works. Or it works too hard. Whatever.“Whatever Works” is rated PG-13  (Parents strongly cautioned). It has some naughty humor and sexual situations.WHATEVER WORKSOpens on Friday in Manhattan. Written and directed by WITH: Ed Begley Jr. (John), 





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;