Les Misérables
7.6
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISIn the first long act of The director Written by Alain Boublil and the composer Claude-Michel Schönberg (with English-language lyrics by Herbert Kretzmer), the musical “Les Misérables” is of course one really big show, perhaps the biggest and certainly one of the longest-running. Its Web siteSomewhere amid the grime, power ballads and surging strings there is also AdvertisementThe first pivots on the antagonism of a onetime prison guard, now inspector, Javert (AdvertisementPart of the tug of “Les Misérables” is that it recounts a familiar, reassuring story of oppression, liberation and redemption, complete with period costumes and tear-yanking songs. Georges Sand apparently felt that there was too much Christianity in Hugo’s novel; Mr. Hooper seems to have felt that there wasn’t enough in the musical and, using his camera like a Magic Marker, repeatedly underlines the religious themes that are already narratively and lyrically manifest. In the first number (“Look Down”), set against a digitally enhanced, visibly artificial port, Valjean helps haul an enormous ship into a dock. Dressed mainly in cardinal red, the prisoners pull on ropes, while singing during a lashing rain, with Javert glaring down at them. (And, yes, he will fall.)By the time the scene ends, Valjean hasn’t just been handed his release papers after 19 years as a prisoner, he has also become a Christ figure, hoisting a preposterously large wooden pole on to his shoulder. Mr. Hooper’s maximalist approach is evident the very moment the scene begins — the camera swooping, as waves and music crash — setting an overblown tone that rarely quiets. His work in this passage, from the roller-coaster moves of the cameras to the loud incidental noise that muffles the lyrics, undermines his actors and begins to push the musical from spectacle toward bloat. Mr. Jackman suffers the most from Mr. Hooper’s approach, as when Valjean paces up and down a hallway while delivering “What Have I Done,” a to-and-fro that witlessly, needlessly, literalizes the character’s internal struggle.Tom Hooper, the director of “Les Misérables,” narrates a scene from the film.Mr. Hooper’s decision to shoot the singing live, as opposed to having the singers lip-sync recorded songs, as has been customary in movie musicals since the 1930s, yields benefits. That’s especially the case with Ms. Hathaway, Mr. Redmayne and Daniel Huttlestone, a scene-stealer who plays the Thénardiers’ young son. (This isn’t the first contemporary musical to resurrect the practice of live singing, which was used for both Mr. Redmayne’s sincerity complements Ms. Seyfried’s old-fashioned trilling and her wide-eyed appearance, even if their romance lacks spark. Then again, so does the movie. Song after song, as relationships and rebellion bloom, you wait in vain for the movie to, as well, and for the filmmaking to rise to the occasion of both its source material and its hard-working performers.As he showed in “Les Misérables” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Gun death, poverty, face boils and revolution.





An earlier version of this review included an erroneous link to information about another film. The correct link provides information about &#8220;The Commitments&#8221; (1991), not &#8220;Commitments&#8221; (2001).A  on Tuesday about &#8220;Les Mis&#233;rables&#8221; misspelled, at one point, the name of the character played by Amanda Seyfried. As the review correctly noted elsewhere, she is Cosette, not Cossette. The review also misidentified a Peter Bogdanovich film that uses live singing, as does &#8220;Les Mis&#233;rables.&#8221; It is &#8220;At Long Last Love,&#8221; not &#8220;They All Laughed.&#8221; And the review referred imprecisely to the customary way that songs have been filmed in movie musicals since the 1930s. Actors have typically lip-synced to recorded songs; it has not been the case that everything was recorded in postproduction.A version of this review appears in print on December 25, 2012, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;