Rise of the Planet of the Apes
7.6
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGIS“Rise of the Planet of the Apes,” an amusingly cheerful film about the end of humanity that’s At once an origin story for that period-appropriate freakout and a solid kick in the franchise pants, the new “Apes” movie takes place in a present that, with a few exceptions (a space mission included), looks plausibly like our own. Mr. Franco — serious, focused, sympathetic — plays Will Rodman, a scientist and romantic idealist who is one hubristic mistake away from becoming a latter-day Frankenstein. Like the shiny headquarters at Gen-Sys, the pharmaceutical giant for which he works, Will makes science look good, as he bustles about in his white lab coat. Rarely have big-pharma-like doings looked so harmless, at least if you don’t count the animals doped up on the would-be wonder drug that Will hopes will cure Alzheimer’s.It isn’t long before that temple of scientific rationalism goes kablooey. One afternoon a prized chimpanzee, nicknamed Bright Eyes for the eerie green tint of her peepers, throws a fit, running amok through the Gen-Sys labs and into the meeting room where Will is pitching his cure to his boss (David Oyelowo) and prospective investors. Oops! Cut down by a bullet, Bright Eyes both ends Will’s immediate dreams and offers him something like a new beginning in the form of her baby, a bundle of beastly joy. Out goes the man of science, as the accidental daddy takes the infant home, where he’s baptized Caesar by Will’s own father, Charles (After this brisk preamble, “Rise of the Planet of the Apes” settles into a playful stretch. Caesar cozies into his human home for an inverse version of the first “Apes” movie (with shades of AdvertisementIt’s likely that the writers Rick Jaffa and Amanda Silver and the director AdvertisementNot to overplay the ethical issues — cuz the movie sure doesn’t. Engineered to entertain, “Rise of the Planet of the Apes” may be awkwardly named, but almost everything else about it is generally easygoing, including the inevitable climactic action and the human and digitally assisted performances. First among the computer creations is Caesar, who evolves from a ball of fluff into a rambunctious child, a sullen teenager and finally a young adult given nuance through performance-capture technology (which combines an actor’s moves with computer-generated imagery) and the efforts of Mr. Wyatt, a British filmmaker whose credits include the independent feature If you wanted to indulge in some old-school 1970s-style paranoia, you could see an analogy between our world, in which digital characters are fast catching up to their human counterparts, and that of “Rise of the Planet of the Apes,” which clears the stage for a coming ape revolution (and doubtless more movies). But that wouldn’t jibe with Mr. Wyatt’s genial, untroubled take on the apocalypse. Though it skews grim in a Dickensian primate facility where Caesar learns some hard truths under heavy hands — and where you could swear the fuzzy inmates chant a protest that sounds remarkably like “Attica! Attica!” — the film is largely, perversely upbeat. It’s the end of the world as we know it, and the animals feel fine.“Rise of the Planet of the ApesOpens on Friday nationwide.Directed by Rupert Wyatt; written by Rick Jaffa and Amanda Silver; director of photography, Andrew Lesnie; edited by Conrad Buff and Mark Goldblatt; music by Patrick Doyle; production design by Claude Paré; costumes by Renée April; visual effects supervisors, Joe Letteri and Dan Lemmon; produced by Mr. Jaffa, Ms. Silver, Peter Chernin and Dylan Clark; released by 20th Century Fox. Running time: 1 hour 50 minutes.WITH: James Franco (Will Rodman), Freida Pinto (Caroline), John Lithgow (Charles Rodman), Brian Cox (John Landon), Tom Felton (Dodge), David Oyelowo (Steven Jacobs), David Hewlett (Hunsiker), Andy Serkis (Caesar) and Terry Notary (Bright Eyes/Rocket).





A version of this review appears in print on August 5, 2011, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;