The Incredible Hulk
6.8
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTFive years ago there was a movie about Dr. Bruce Banner, a scientist who, when agitated, turns large and green. It was called The new movie about poor Dr. Banner, directed by Louis Leterrier (The latest Hulk, a computer-generated behemoth with torn pants and tousled hair, is a slightly improved version of the character created by The origin story, dwelled upon at great length in “Hulk,” is here telescoped into a neat little montage that accompanies the opening titles. Bruce was conducting research for the Army under the supervision of a cigar-smoking general (Advertisement“Get our agents to look for a white man in that bottling plant!” the general barks when he learns of Bruce’s whereabouts. Though Brazil is home to millions of people who might fit the general’s description, the military has no trouble finding Bruce’s modest little home. A member of the squad sent to bring him in — the general wants Bruce’s data for further study, you see — is a hard case named Blonsky (The creature looks better that way than he does when, a while later, he emerges in the light of day to smash up some government hardware on a Virginia college campus. Though the Hulk’s distended muscles are impressively veined — he looks less rubbery, and therefore more credible, than his precursor in “Hulk” — the scale and proportion of his body don’t seem quite right. His head is weirdly small, and his size in relation to other people and objects appears to fluctuate. Also, why is his hair so much darker than Mr. Norton’s?That there is no resemblance between them is perhaps to be expected, but it also exposes a genetic flaw that makes “The Incredible Hulk” less interesting — clumsier, more brutish — than many of its comic-book-derived counterparts. Superhero movies depend not only on virtuosic special effects or action set pieces, but also, perhaps even more, on the psychological drama of existential division. The mild-mannered reporter is also the man of steel; the reclusive millionaire dons mask and cape to fight evil.AdvertisementThe better superhero performances explore the tensions inherent in their protagonists’ double  lives. Tobey Maguire’s Peter Parker is first liberated and then burdened by the demands of being Spider-Man. The various X-Men grapple with the social and emotional challenges of mutant-hood. More recently, Robert Downey Jr. used the ethical predicaments of Iron Man as the basis for a brilliantly complicated and unpredictable characterization. But the contradictions and continuities between Bruce Banner and the monster he becomes figure surprisingly little in “The Incredible Hulk.” When Betty asks Bruce what the transformation feels like he answers that the Hulk “isn’t me,” and in taking this disavowal at face value the movie sacrifices opportunities for pathos as well as humor.A few such possibilities are hinted at. The blood-pressure thing makes Bruce afraid of having sex (though Betty seems somewhat intrigued by the idea), and Mr. Norton does a credible enough job of conveying how tiresome it must be to shred your shoes and clothes. But without a vivid, complex character at the center of the movie, even the more inspired bits — Tim Blake Nelson’s tenured mad scientist, a climactic battle on the streets of Harlem — feel perfunctory and familiar. A middling superhero movie! I wish I could say that was incredible.“The Incredible Hulk” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has the usual comic-book mayhem.THE INCREDIBLE HULKOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by Louis Leterrier; written by Zak Penn, based on the Marvel comic book by WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page E1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;