The Giver
6.5
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe Times critic Manohla Dargis reviews “The Giver.”By the time the sounds of the Von Trapp children warbling The black-and-white world of the setting also suggests that you’re back in Kansas, as do the flickering rainbow colors that can be seen only by Jonas (Brenton Thwaites). Jonas lives with his “family unit” (Alexander Skarsgard and Katie Holmes play his folks) in a culture as quiet, cold and inert as a crypt. Along with his friends, Fiona (Odeya Rush) and Asher (Cameron Monaghan), Jonas is about to become a worker bee. Once grown, each citizen is assigned to a specific job, explains the Chief Elder (Jonas becomes the Receiver of Memory, which means that he gets to hang out with the only jumpy cat in this mausoleum, the Giver, an older dude played by What follows is the usual hero’s journey mixed in with sloppy montage sequences that are meant to represent the memories the Giver is passing to Jonas but mostly evoke one of those tear-jerking commercials that sell their wares with gurgling babies and squirming puppies. The director Phillip Noyce — working with a lamentable script credited to Michael Mitnick and Robert B. Weide, and saddled with cheap digital effects and sets that needed more money or imagination or both — can’t do much here, but doesn’t seem to be trying hard, either. About the only other thing worth mentioning is that this is yet another cinematic dystopia, in the wake of “The Giver,” the first book in the Giver Quartet, was published in 1993 and almost immediately eyed by Mr. Bridges as a screen property. In the decades since, publishers and filmmakers have continued to exploit the seemingly interminable craze for young-adult bummers with varying success. Ms. Lowry’s “The Giver” preceded both the “Hunger Games” and “Divergent” book series, to name two popular feel-bad sagas. Yet because both “The Hunger Games” and “Divergent” hit the screen first, the movie version of “The Giver” — scene by formulaic scene, narrative cliché by cliché — can’t help but come off as a poor copy of those earlier pictures.In the end, it taketh — your time, patience and faith in newly imagined dystopias — more than it giveth.“The Giver” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Infanticide and child endangerment.





A version of this review appears in print on August 15, 2014, on Page C12 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;