Limitless
7.4
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTIs there a cure for writer’s block? (And no, “get a real job” doesn’t count.) A recent More recently, drugs like Adderall have enjoyed a half-shadowy Such an existence eludes Eddie Morra (Adding romantic insult to professional injury, his girlfriend, Lindy (AdvertisementBetween the last two items in that series, Eddie swallows Vernon’s pill, a not-quite-legal substance called NZT, which allows him to tap into previously neglected areas of his brain. Supposedly, human beings — even writers! — use only a fraction of that mighty organ at a time, and the idea that we could, via a quick biochemical fix, have access to all of its powers raises many intriguing possibilities, a few of which “Limitless” sets out to explore.AdvertisementMr. Burger, whose previous films include He assimilates information by means of old-fashioned film editing — a fast shuffle of close-ups, usually resolving to a shot of Mr. Cooper’s Windex-blue eyes — and also through fancier tricks. As Eddie’s writer’s block breaks, letters float down from the ceiling of his apartment, recalling the cascading numbers of “A Beautiful Mind.”But Eddie’s mind is not an altogether pretty place. Mr. Cooper has a special gift for impersonating a certain type of ordinary guy — handsome, smart and friendly enough, but also kind of a jerk. More than “Neil Burger discusses a scene from his film "Limitless," starring Bradley Cooper as a writer whose life is changed by a mysterious drug.Granted the Promethean bounty of unlimited intelligence, what does Eddie do? Just what any other shallow, striving 21st-century American man would be likely to do: make more money, have more sex and write a book, though not quite in that order. The book turns out to be something of a red herring — or rather, one of many plot points that the movie picks up, drops behind the radiator, trips over and sends flying across the room as it runs its hectic course.The expansion of Eddie’s mental capacity does not lead to any corresponding growth in wisdom or imagination. Quite the contrary: the more clearly and quickly he thinks, the shallower he becomes. To be sure, he learns to play the piano and picks up fluency in a smattering of foreign languages and high-flown cultural idioms, but these skills are mostly useful in getting women to sleep with him. And the cultural knowledge that is most handy comes from the kung fu movies and boxing matches he suddenly remembers from childhood when he is attacked by a bunch of thugs on a subway platform one night.In keeping with Eddie’s predicament — and the drug has its downsides, of course — “Limitless” has a little too much on its mind. To maintain a sense of velocity and complication, it throws Eddie into trouble with a Russian loan shark (Andrew Howard), a couple of murders and a Wall Street tycoon with the Seussian name Van Loon. As Van Loon, That is not because of Lindy’s good sense — she goes back to Eddie as soon as he cuts off his ratty ponytail and buys some new clothes — but because the filmmakers seem to have misplaced their supply of coherence pills. Too many matters, medical and otherwise, go unexplained, and the intimations of grand conspiracy that pursue Eddie don’t quite pay off the way you want them to.But what “Limitless” lacks in structural neatness it makes up for in energy and antic, bristling wit. It’s an unexpectedly funny movie, and for a while this seems mainly like a function of Mr. Cooper’s charm.AdvertisementEddie’s fate, however, turns out to be a barbed and nasty joke, and at the last moment the film reveals itself to have been a seductively cynical, sharp-eyed comic fable for an age of greed and speed. It suggests that evolution has given us extraordinary brains, and that if someone could only take hold of this gift, there is no telling what he might do: engineer a corporate merger, run for political office, buy a huge apartment, order food at a restaurant in a foreign language.Finish a piece of writing on deadline. Nothing would ever be the same.“Limitless” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Violence, sexuality and the consumption of prodigious quantities of an imaginary drug.LIMITLESSOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on March 18, 2011, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;