Beneath The Harvest Sky
6.2
AdvertisementBy STEPHEN HOLDENA scene from the film.Geography is destiny. Even in the land of opportunity, the place you are born and brought up has a lot to do with determining your future. And if that place is Van Buren, Me., a dingy, fading agricultural town on the Canadian border, there is not much of a future to look forward to.This is the world of Filmed in a quasidocumentary style using hand-held cameras, extreme close-ups and a muddy palette, this slice of regional life aspires to be a northern New England answer to The boys are pooling their meager resources to buy a used red sports car to drive to Boston with no particular goal beyond getting out of Van Buren and going to Red Sox games. But Casper’s fantasies of escape are dashed when his 15-year-old girlfriend, Tasha (Zoe Levin), announces she is pregnant. A hormonal firecracker who is Cain to Dominic’s Abel, Casper reacts to the news with a stunned, sullen silence.Dominic, explaining his loyalty to his volatile buddy, declares, “When I’m with Casper, I know something crazy is going to happen.” And in a place where they are first seen idly throwing stones at a rusted water tower, shooting potatoes out of a cannon and going on a “moose safari,” crazy is better than nothing.AdvertisementDominic shyly pursues a romance with Emma (Sarah Sutherland), with whom he works in the potato fields. Planning to go to college and knowing that she may not return, Emma disappoints him by characterizing their bond as a “harvest” friendship.Because Casper and Dominic’s relationship is the center of the movie, other key characters remain underdeveloped. Casper works for his father, Clayton (Aidan Gillen from “Game of Thrones”), a small-time crook who smuggles in Canadian pharmaceuticals that make their way down the Interstate 95 corridor. The operation is a family affair that involves Clayton’s jittery brother, Badger (Timm Sharp), who is arrested by state drug enforcement agents and pressured to gather evidence against Clayton.These scenes have explosive dramatic potential, but they aren’t sufficiently developed to convey the sense of tragic inevitability that underlies the story. The characters aren’t properly introduced, and as the increasingly choppy film zigzags among several subplots, you long for a dramatic grounding wire as compelling as Melissa Leo in “Beneath the Harvest Sky” reaches a dramatic climax that is so rushed and confusing, you are left scratching your head. But for all its missteps, the film feels authentic. Through thick and thin, it stubbornly maintains a thorny integrity.





A version of this review appears in print on May 2, 2014, on Page C11 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;