17 Again
6.4
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISWhat is The dewy Mr. Efron is also, of course, the most visible star of the In pop cinema terms that premise is  almost  as old as Jodie Foster,  who starred in the first Meanwhile he works it  — man, does he work it   — strutting across the screen like a teen idol (like Zac Efron!), playing the star with an easy smile, insouciant haircut and even bared muscles: his character, Mike, is shooting hoops without a shirt in the very first shot of the movie. (Cue the shrieks.) The story, written by Jason Filardi, pivots emotionally on the moment when Mike turned his back on a potential basketball scholarship and all the good things that would have presumably come with it because he decided to dry the eyes of his weeping girlfriend, Scarlet (Allison Miller as the teenager, Leslie Mann as the adult).  From the age of adult Mike and Scarlet’s oldest teenager it’s clear that, back in 1989, they were Just Saying Yes.AdvertisementGiven the story’s obnoxious implications — sex, meaning girls, can ruin your life — it’s no surprise that Scarlet doesn’t get the chance to revisit her past and tell her boyfriend to put on a condom. Instead the adult Mike clicks his heels or rather falls into a badly computer-generated whirlpool trying to chase a stranger with a menacing twinkle (Brian Doyle-Murray),  who guides him to  his journey. Suddenly, Mike is 17 again and sloshing  inside his business suit. He takes refuge with his best friend, Ned (a hilarious Thomas Lennon, nearly sprinting away with the movie), a former late-20th-century high school dweeb turned early-21st-century master of the universe who lives in a Modernist  house crammed with pricey boy toys and sleeps in a AdvertisementThe director, Burr Steers, whose other credits include “17 Again” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Girls are particularly cautioned. 17 AGAINOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by Burr Steers; written by Jason Filardi; director of photography, Tim Suhrstedt; edited by Padraic McKinley; music by Rolfe Kent; production designer, Garreth Stover; produced by Adam Shankman and Jennifer Gibgot; released by New Line Cinema/ Warner Brothers Pictures. Running time: 1 hour 34 minutes.WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page C8 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;