The A-Team
6.8
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe biggest hurdle that confronted the makers of the “The A-Team,” the raucous, winking big-screen version of the raucous, winking small-screen 1980s television show, wasn’t logistical. The problem wasn’t how to demolish this van (throw something heavy on it) or destroy that helicopter (write a software program) or toss bodies through the air (cue the stunt men and more software).It wasn’t even making sure that the audience doesn’t burst out laughing whenever No, the obstacle that the director It apparently originated when the television executive Brandon Tartikoff asked for “ ‘Mission: Impossible,’ ‘The Dirty Dozen’ and ‘The Magnificent Seven’ all rolled into one, and Mr. T drives the car.” With Frank Lupo, Stephen J. Cannell, the auteur behind AdvertisementThe desire to capitalize on the success of the original “A-Team” is understandable, as is the failure to transpose its mix of hyperbolic action and cheesy humor to the big screen. The show’s pilot featured a chase sequence on a movie back lot in which Peppard, as the group’s leader, Hannibal Smith, sits in a convertible driven by Mr. T while dressed in a rubber reptile suit and smoking a stogie.AdvertisementTop that, Mr. Carnahan! He can’t, partly because what made “The A-Team” work — heroes who at once embrace and lampoon the tough-guy persona and the accompanying genre fixings — is such a familiar strategy, from the late James Bond films through the It goes without saying that wisecracking tough guys in the movies are as old hat as the fedora that Humphrey Bogart wears in Among other things, the characters in movies like “The A-Team” and The same fate awaits “The A-Team,” which, like the show’s pilot, opens in Mexico with some ay-caramba clichés: a sneering general, snarling minions, growling dogs. This time Hannibal is played by I could describe what happens next, but since no one involved with this movie appears to have paid much mind to the story, including Mr. Carnahan and his co-writers, Brian Bloom and Skip Woods, there’s no reason to bother. The point of this movie, in any event, isn’t the plot, which in this case is a leftover stew of action-flick ingredients, including villains who work for (gasp) American spy agencies and antagonistic former lovers one kiss away from liftoff. What counts in movies of this sort is moving the characters around on the game board in ways that are simultaneously identifiable (so you get what you expected) and newish (so you don’t feel ripped off) — well, that, and blowing stuff up.From the repetitive looks of it, Mr. Carnahan enjoys blowing stuff up almost as much as he enjoys letting you know how much he enjoys blowing stuff up: as he has in movies like “The A-Team” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). The violence emphasizes the cartoonish moment of impact — Pow! Crunch! Splat! — rather than the bloody, disgusting aftermath. The A-TeamOpens on Friday nationwide.
Directed by Joe Carnahan; written by Mr.
Carnahan, Brian Bloom and Skip Woods,
based on the television series; director of
photography, Mauro Fiore; edited by
Roger Barton and Jim May; music by
Alan Silvestri; production designer,
Charles Wood; costumes by Betsy Heimann;
produced by Stephen J. Cannell,
Spike Seldin, Tony Scott, Jules Daly, Alex
Young and Iain Smith; released by 20th
Century Fox. Running time: 1 hour 57
minutes.WITH: Liam Neeson (Hannibal Smith),
Bradley Cooper (Face), Jessica Biel (Charissa
Sosa), Quinton Jackson (B. A. Baracus),
Sharlto Copley (Howlin’ Mad) and
Patrick Wilson (Lynch).





A version of this review appears in print on June 11, 2010, on Page C6 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;