Underworld: Rise of the Lycans
6.6
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISTricked out in leather and heavy metal hair, the British actor Set primarily in the lair of the vampires, a dark castle bathed in moon-blue light and dappled with pools of black shadow, the film offers few surprises other than Mr. Sheen’s vigorous, physical performance. Although the presence of Mr. Sheen — who  currently can be seen twinkling as David Frost in “Frost/Nixon” and is probably best known for playing Prime Minister Tony Blair in Unlike Mr. Nighy, who puts an amusing camp spin on his every line and gesture, Mr. Sheen appears to have taken his monster duties seriously: his eyes pop with menace, and he howls up a mighty storm. Though the director, Patrick Tatopoulos, clearly likes the looks of the female lead, Rhona Mitra as Sonja, Viktor’s daughter and Lucian’s lover, he gives Mr. Sheen plenty of face time. The actor’s value is particularly evident during the various fight sequences, which — because they are underlighted and, as is too often the case in contemporary genre cinema, overedited —  come across as needlessly chaotic. It’s at moments like these that Mr. Sheen’s bright eyes become beacons, two points of light in the murky dark.“Underworld: Rise of the Lycans” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Spurting blood and impaled flesh. UNDERWORLDRise of the LycansOpened on Friday nationwide. Directed by Patrick Tatopoulos; written by Danny McBride, Dirk Blackman and Howard McCain, based on a story by Len Wiseman, Robert Orr and Mr. McBride and characters created by Kevin Grevioux, Mr. Wiseman and Mr. McBride; director of photography, Ross Emery; edited by Peter Amundson; music by Paul Haslinger; production designer, Dan Hennah; creature design by Mr. Tatopoulos; produced by Tom Rosenberg, Gary Lucchesi, Mr. Wiseman and Richard Wright; released by Screen Gems. Running time: 1 hour 32 minutes.WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page C13 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;