Don Jon
6.6
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe Times critic Manohla Dargis reviews "Don Jon."Once upon a time “Don Jon” had the unhappy title “Don Jon’s Addiction.” That was in January at the So now the title just suggests Don Juan, the fictional Spanish libertine whose womanizing ways lead to — depending on who tells or sings the tale — comic and tragic fates, including a descent into hell and an ascent into redemptive love. And while addiction may make Jon sound like a bummer, as played with great swagger and subterranean wit by the movie’s writer and director, Which is directly to the point of this deceptively sincere movie about masculinity and its discontents that Mr. Gordon-Levitt, making a fine feature directing debut, shapes into a story about a young man’s moral education. That schooling begins the night that Jon, a New Jersey bartender and a regular at a club throbbing with beats and bodies, first sees Barbara Sugarman (a superb Barbara has her own addiction, specifically to the kind of storybook romance that, the movie suggests, reduces human relations to commercial transactions as much as pornography does. Mr. Gordon-Levitt has fun with this idea (and with cameos from Anne Hathaway and Channing Tatum) without fully developing it. “Don Jon” takes women seriously, but like a lot of contemporary American movies, including many romantic comedies, it’s mostly interested in what it means to be a feeling, thinking man in a world in which many of the old certainties have disappeared. Each time Jon sits down to a family dinner — his mother (Glenne Headly) bustling in the kitchen as his father (Tony Danza) waits at the table — the comedy feels almost ethnographic, as if you were watching a soon-to-be-extinct tribe.At times, Mr. Gordon-Levitt almost smothers his intelligent movie in jokes, as with the repeated references to Jon’s pad, his ride, his girls and boys, all of which register fairly soon as markers or even trophies of an obsessively cultivated narcissism. With his pumped physique and shellacked hair, his tight pants and hard jaw, Jon is as much a walking, talking cartoon as the representations he onanistically worships, so it’s fitting that the movie opens with an actual animation. It’s the first in a flurry of equally cartoonish images, now of real women, which flash across the screen and, as the pace of the editing accelerates, turn into a flurry of pneumatic breasts, bulbous buttocks and cavernous mouths. It’s a kind of dismemberment by montage, although here it’s finally Jon who’s in pieces.To a degree, “Don Jon” echoes an idea that the film theorist Linda Williams advances toward the end of “Hard Core: Power, Pleasure, and the ‘Frenzy of the Visible,’ ” her revolutionary feminist study of pornographic films and their contradictions. “Pornography as a genre wants to be about sex,” Ms. Williams writes. “On close inspection, however, it always proves to be more about gender.” Mr. Gordon-Levitt effectively translates that thesis into funny, eventually touching and dramatic terms in his movie, which shifts registers when Jon meets an almost ghostly older woman, Esther (a tender, true Julianne Moore). After presenting him with a 1970s Danish pornographic film directed by a woman, Esther offers Jon something more valuable and, just maybe, deliverance.Advertisement“Don Jon” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Female and male nudity.





A version of this review appears in print on September 27, 2013, on Page C13 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;