The Secret Life of Walter Mitty
7.3
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTThe Times critic A. O. Scott reviews "The Secret Life of Walter Mitty."As imagined by Ben Stiller, Walter Mitty is a man out of step with his time. An archetypal daydreamer introduced to the public by In a world dominated by overgrown boy-men with runaway ids, Walter suffers from a highly unusual affliction: an excess of maturity. The first thing we see him doing is balancing his checkbook with a ballpoint pen. Though we might be tempted, at first, to suppose that his highly developed sense of responsibility is the result of a compulsive personality, we soon learn that it arises from personal tragedy. As a teenager, Walter lost his father, and ever since then he has worked to support his mother (Shirley MacLaine) and sister (Kathryn Hahn) and to hold onto a sense of security in an uncertain universe. Workplace bullies might make fun of him, mocking his nerdy clothes and self-effacing manner, but from the start this Walter is, for the audience, a magnet for our sympathy. Not Thurber’s feckless Everyman or Kaye’s holy fool, but a sad, decent guy in need of protection and love.Walter’s wild bouts of invention — he pictures himself leaping through the window of a burning building, tearing through the streets of Manhattan on a wild action-movie chase and doing other superhero-type stuff — represent some of the adventure he has sacrificed in a life of duty and drudgery. Employed in the photography department at Life magazine, he has a crush on a co-worker named Cheryl (A relic of the analog world, Walter is in danger of being downsized out of a job as the magazine prepares its final print edition. His desperate efforts to locate a missing negative — and a mysterious photographer played by Sean Penn — lead him on a caper much wilder than anything he had dreamed up. Following cryptic clues (which Cheryl helps him decode), he travels to Iceland, Afghanistan and other far-flung places, and the movie becomes a lavish, surreal travelogue, blending digital effects with stunning landscape montages.AdvertisementIt also, somewhat more riskily, tries to fold the kind of playful, wide-eyed high spirits familiar from the “Night at the Museum” movies into what is in effect a midlife melodrama. This is Walter Mitty by way of AdvertisementOr maybe not entirely. Though it is a celebration of modesty, there is also quite a lot of vanity in “The Secret Life of Walter Mitty.” (And quite a lot of corporate propaganda too, for Papa John’s Pizza, Cinnabon and eHarmony, the online dating site represented by the irreverent, just-a-regular-guy-like-you presence of Patton Oswalt.) Mr. Stiller (working from a screenplay by Steven Conrad) is not content to be the hero of the story; he turns Walter into an almost-martyr and a would-be saint, a mystical self-help guru whose journey of self-discovery makes him better than everyone else, though of course he is too enlightened to say so.There is a contradiction here: An ordinary fellow should not have to be quite so special to win our admiration. And this version of Walter Mitty undermines some of the democratic whimsy that has made his story such an appealing and durable modern myth. He used to be one of us: a self-deluded dreamer charmed by his unruly creative powers, a willing prisoner of his appetite for escapism. But now our identification gives way to envy, and he is another one of those enchanted people the rest of us can only dream of becoming.“The Secret Life of Walter Mitty” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). A bit of crude humor and some rough action.





A version of this review appears in print on December 25, 2013, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;