Life As We Know It
6.6
AdvertisementBy STEPHEN HOLDENIt’s enough to say that the bland romantic comedy “Life as We Know It,” in which there is not a single deviation from formula, is well made for its corporate type. One sign that the movie, directed by Greg Berlanti from a screenplay by Ian Deitchman and Kristin Rusk Robinson, has its unimaginative head on straight is that its lead characters actually have jobs that the film explores in some depth.Holly Berenson (In the following months the two pretty much ignore each other at social events. But when their friends, who have a new baby girl, die in a car accident, they are horrified to find themselves named co-guardians of the child. If they accept the responsibility, they will have to live together in their friends’ house. After much debating and arguing, they reluctantly agree to take on the challenge. From here, Sophie, who is played by three children, is a somewhat colicky infant who puts her guardians through the wringer. There are the inevitable spit-up and dirty-diaper incidents. In a joke that wants to be the equivalent of the hair-gel scene in Time spent under the same roof steadily erodes Holly and Messer’s mutual loathing, and the rom-com inevitable happens. But then their upward career trajectories kick in and create new problems.AdvertisementOne premise that is impossible to swallow is that surrogate parenthood would mellow Messer to the point that in less than a year he would be a caring, self-sacrificing goody-two-shoes. Mr. Duhamel is so good-looking that female viewers may give his character the benefit of the doubt, simply out of wishful thinking. But once outside the theater, they may think again and realize that this kinder, gentler Messer is a preposterous invention.Ms. Heigl’s high-strung, wide-eyed Holly is all brass and sharp angles. She has the same eager-beaver quality as Anne Hathaway without the psychological depth. It is a bright, shiny, slightly unnerving performance delivered with an oversize, fire-breathing self-assurance. The screenplay gives Holly an alternative chance at happiness by throwing in a Dr. McDreamy in the person of Sophie’s handsome, empathetic divorced pediatrician (Josh Lucas). The movie’s attention to detail and to tying up loose ends adds to its too-long running time (115 minutes), and you wait impatiently while “Life as We Know It” finishes its final laps. By then, a woman in a nearby seat at the screening I attended had already lost interest and was rapt in her digital device.“Life as We Know It” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has some strong language, pot smoking and a mild sex scene. LIFE AS WE KNOW ITOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by Greg Berlanti; written by Ian Deitchman and Kristin Rusk Robinson; director of photography, Andrew Dunn; edited by Jim Page; music by Blake Neely; production design by Maher Ahmad; costumes by Debra McGuire; produced by Barry Josephson and Paul Brooks; released by Warner Brothers Pictures. Running time: 1 hour 15 minutes.WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on October 8, 2010, on Page C4 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;