The Last Song
5.8
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTT“The Last Song”The movies share tried-and-true elements of the Sparks formula: star-crossed love with a hint of class disparity (but no nonwhite characters of any consequence); terminal illness; late-breaking revelations and plot twists. “Dear John,” directed by Not that it is easy to strike the proper emotional tone in a movie that is as stuffed with bogus feeling and overwrought incident as a fast-food burrito. Ms. Cyrus’s character, a recent high school graduate named Ronnie, arrives at her father’s beautifully run-down beach house on the Georgia coast carrying quite a bit of baggage. Dad (Greg Kinnear) and mom (Kelly Preston) are divorced, leaving Ronnie and her younger brother, Jonah (Bobby Coleman), in some distress. Ronnie, a piano prodigy since childhood, has abandoned her and her father’s dreams of Juilliard, and she’s had some trouble with the law.So much more trouble ensues that “The Last Song,” if not for its sluggish pacing and soft lighting, might turn into farce. In addition to the terminal illness (signaled by a telltale cough around the movie’s midpoint), there is a church fire that Ronnie’s dad is believed to have started, a wayward friend with a bad boyfriend, another friend with a dead brother, a nest of sea turtle eggs menaced by a raccoon, and a romance — did I mention it was star-crossed? — with a hunky beach volleyball player named Will. That’s Mr. Hemsworth, a star graduate of the Taylor Lautner Academy of Shirtless Emoting.Will, by the way, is also a mechanic, a volunteer at the local aquarium and a young man whose family has issues of its own. One major problem with “The Last Song” is that it can’t manage to sort through its various issues  in any dramatically compelling way, instead falling into a slack, soap-opera rhythm in which potentially catastrophic developments seem to have no lasting emotional effects.AdvertisementAnother big problem is Ms. Cyrus. Her Hannah Montana persona has a certain aggressive charm, though I wish my kids would turn down the volume sometimes, and she seems to be a young celebrity with a good attitude and a strong work ethic. But  acting, for the moment at least, seems almost entirely beyond her. In “The Last Song” she pouts, slouches, storms in and out of rooms and occasionally cracks a snaggle-toothed smile, but most of the time she seems to be mugging for the camera, play-acting rather than exploring the motives and feelings of her character.Not that anyone else fares much better. While it’s nice to see Mr. Kinnear play an entirely sympathetic character for a change, his slyness and subtlety seem wasted in a project that has no interest in either. The beach looks really nice, though. It would be a nice place to spend a summer, as long as nobody died or fell in love.“The Last Song” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Love and Death — chaste and nonviolent. THE LAST SONGOpens on Wednesday  nationwide. Directed by Julie Anne Robinson; written by Nicholas Sparks and Jeff Van Wie, based on the novel by Mr. Sparks; director of photography, John Lindley; edited by Nancy Richardson; music by Aaron Zigman; production designer, Nelson Coates; costumes by Louise Frogley; produced by Adam Shankman and Jennifer Gibgot; released by Touchstone Pictures. Running time: 1 hour 48 minutes.WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on March 31, 2010, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;