Despicable Me 2
7.5
AdvertisementBy STEPHEN HOLDENThe Times critic Stephen Holden reviews "Despicable Me 2."In its frantic, Looney Tunes-style madness, That said, the new movie — concocted by the same hands (the directors Pierre Coffin and Gru has come a long way since he aspired to be the world’s worst bad guy in the original movie. His cold heart has thawed since his adoption of three little girls. Despite his funny multinational accent, the reformed Gru is something of a bore.The domestication of this once-fearsome grouch continues in “Despicable Me 2.” Gru, with his hearing-impaired mad scientist partner, Dr. Nefario (Russell Brand), has started a jam-and-jelly business whose tasteless products nobody wants. Just as his operation is about to fail, Gru is hired by the Anti-Villain League to locate a world-class baddie who uses a flying magnet to steal a secret research lab in the Arctic Circle. The lab has perfected a serum that causes grotesque mutations. Gru and his sidekick, the practical, no-nonsense Lucy (A prime suspect is Eduardo (Benjamin Bratt), the gregarious, preening owner of the mall’s Mexican restaurant, Salsa &amp; Salsa. He bears a suspicious resemblance to El Macho, a legendary outlaw who supposedly died while riding a shark into an active volcano with explosives strapped on his back. Sure enough, they are one and the same. Eduardo’s son, Antonio (Moises Arias), who struts around like a shifty-eyed teenage Valentino, takes an instant shine to Gru’s eldest daughter, Margo (Miranda Cosgrove), who swoons at the first sight of him.An early sign that Gru has a formidable foe is the capture by magnet of his legion of cute, obedient yellow Minions, whom the serum transforms into an enemy force of furry purple warriors. But like Margo’s ill-fated crush, the premise is rushed; an antidote to the serum is concocted almost as soon as the mass abduction takes place.Meanwhile, Gru’s youngest daughter, Agnes (“Despicable Me 2” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested) for rude humor.





A version of this review appears in print on July 3, 2013, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;