Tron: Legacy
6.8
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISWhen Three decades later Disney has gone back to the electronic drawing board and returned with “Tron: Legacy,” a sequel with far less color and cinematic imagination, and many more bells and whistles, including a freakishly special-effected Mr. Bridges going mano a mano in cyberspace with the grizzled real deal. Twice as much Jeff Bridges does not necessarily mean twice as much entertainment — bummer. But it does offer the sight of the actor returning to the same kind of paycheck-padding gig that landed him in the first “Tron,” if without a young man’s embarrassment. He’s Jeff Bridges, man, and having been summoned to reprise his role as Kevin Flynn, computer genius, he wears a beatific Zen gaze and the look of a man having a pretty good time.The first “Tron” ended  after  Kevin, having vanquished a computer program that looked like a neon Easter Island statue and talked like a Directed by the newcomer AdvertisementThe sequel’s big draw, of course, is that renovated realm, now called the Grid and kitted out in 3-D. What a disappointment! Although the new Tronville has its attractions, the vibrating kaleidoscopic colors that gave the first movie its visual punch have been replaced by a monotonous palette of glassy black and blue and sunbursts of orange and yellow. As if to emphasize the network connectivity of it all, the buildings, vehicles and costumes are outlined, usually in whitish-blue, an electronic piping that also emphasizes the geometry of the forms. In the action scenes these light ribbons turn into lovely streaks, but at other times, all the dark and the Daft Punk throbbing bring to mind a rave filled with revelers waving glow sticks.AdvertisementEventually Sam finds  Kevin, who’s been growing old in cyberspace in a Space Age  bachelor pad that, with its luminescent white panels, indicates that he watched Those limits are even starker in “Tron: Legacy,” which, in its sampling of old movies (its predecessor included), only emphasizes  how uninterested the filmmakers are in showing you something you haven’t seen before. As a consequence Clu proves as much a visual distraction as a tiresome, villainous inevitability. The concluding showdown follows the usual action beats, a disappointingly generic turn, particularly given that voluptuous programs called the Sirens suggest that the screenwriters Edward Kitsis and Adam Horowitz were out for more. Although the story pivots on Sam’s search for his father, the power struggle between Kevin and Clu indicates that the writers, both veterans of the television show “Tron: Legacy” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). Mild violence and milder language.TRON: LEGACYOpens on Friday  nationwide. Directed by WITH: 





Today’s Film
Reviews: ALIEN GIRL, a Russian-language
film directed by Anton
Bormatov. 12
CASINO JACK, directed by
George Hickenlooper. 20
HOW DO YOU KNOW, directed
by James L. Brooks. 19
RABBIT HOLE, directed by
John Cameron Mitchell. 10
SATAN HATES YOU, directed
by James Felix McKenney.
12
TRON: LEGACY, directed by
Joseph Kosinski. 1
YOGI BEAR, a film directed
by Eric Brevig. 12A version of this review appears in print on December 17, 2010, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;