Coming to America
7.0
LEAD: Eddie Murphy's new film has a good title,''Coming to America,'' a possibly funny idea (a black African prince travels incognito to New York to find a wife) and a screenplay that seems to have escaped its doctors before it was entirely well.
Eddie Murphy's new film has a good title,''Coming to America,'' a possibly funny idea (a black African prince travels incognito to New York to find a wife) and a screenplay that seems to have escaped its doctors before it was entirely well.

''Coming to America'' is something new for Mr. Murphy. It is a romantic comedy, though nobody except the star seems aware of the fact.

On the evening of his 21st birthday, Prince Akeem (Mr. Murphy), heir to the throne of Zamunda, is introduced to the bride-to-be of his arranged marriage. She is as beautiful as he could wish, but having been raised to give way to the prince in all things, she's not his idea of fun and stimulation for the long haul.

When he orders her to disobey him, she lowers her eyes and dutifully says, ''No.'' This could be the beginning of a crazy kind of Monty Python debate about the nature of disobedience, but the scene stops there. Instead, Akeem is given 40 days' grace in which to sow some royal wild oats abroad.

Once in New York, accompanied by Semmi (Arsenio Hall), his aide-de-camp, Akeem goes underground in Queens in an attempt to escape the responsibilities of princeship. There are encounters with hookers, hustlers and deadbeats. There's also love at the first sight of Lisa McDowell (Shari Headley), the pretty daughter of a fellow who runs a fast-food restaurant, which, bearing his name, has the people at McDonald's in a suing mood.

Though ''Coming to America'' is a romantic comedy, John Landis, the director, and David Sheffield and Barry W. Blaustein, the writers, steer the film more often toward quick, in-and-out comic situations and gags that are only mildly funny. In part this is due to the fact that Mr. Murphy plays the prince with cheerful, low-keyed innocence that is completely legitimate, but is not supported by the short attention span of the screenplay. The romance is tepid.

''Coming to America'' comes to life fitfully when it turns rude and raw, or when Mr. Murphy and Mr. Hall are allowed to throw themselves into the sort of sketch material that made Mr. Murphy a star on television.

Mr. Sheffield and Mr. Blaustein, who wrote material for Mr. Murphy on ''Saturday Night Live,'' contribute some very brief, entertaining revue bits in which Mr. Murphy and Mr. Hall turn up as a number of other characters. Two of these are so off-the-wall and so disguised that one can only be sure who has been playing whom by watching the closing credits.

Mr. Hall, best known as an effusive talk-show host on television, seems most comfortable when he is doing his cameos, including one as the emotional Reverend Brown. James Earl Jones and Madge Sinclair, playing Akeem's regal parents, display consistent comic authority that's not evident in the rest of the movie. It's possible that Mr. Landis, the director of what is still Mr. Murphy's best comedy, ''Trading Places,'' couldn't care less about consistency.

''Coming to America,'' which opens today at Loew's Astor Plaza and other theaters, even manages to work in those two ruthless old millionaires (Don Ameche and Ralph Bellamy) from ''Trading Places.'' The gag, one of the film's better ones, is typical of ''Coming to America'' and can be instantly forgotten. 
ONCE UPON A TIME - COMING TO AMERICA, directed by John Landis; screenplay by David Sheffield and Barry W. Blaustein, story by Eddie Murphy; director of photography, Woody Omens; film editor, Malcolm Campbell; music by Nile Rodgers; production designer, Richard MacDonald; produced by Robert D. Wachs and George Folsey Jr.; released by Paramount Pictures. At Loews Astor Plaza, at 44th Street west of Broadway; Loews Orpheum, 86th Street near Third Avenue, and other theaters. Running time: 115 minutes. This film is rated R. 
Prince Akeem...Eddie Murphy 
Semmi...Arsenio Hall 
The King of Zamunda...James Earl Jones 
Mr. McDowell...John Amos 
The Queen of Zamunda...Madge Sinclair 
Lisa McDowell...Shari Headley