Ted 2
6.3
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISAt one point in the comedy dead zone known as Seth MacFarlane’s “Seth MacFarlane narrates the opening credit sequence from “Ted 2.”Mr. MacFarlane can be funny, but “Ted 2” is insultingly lazy hack work that is worth discussing primarily because of how he tries and fails to turn race, and specifically black men, into comedy fodder. Again, the story involves Ted, who once upon a time was transformed from a fuzzy-wuzzy into a trash-talking, dope-smoking insult puppet. Ted’s efforts to be a husband and father lead to assorted complications, most important a legal battle that forces him to prove he’s human rather than property. To that end, Mr. MacFarlane aligns Ted’s struggle with enslaved black Americans so that, while watching a scene in “Roots” in which Kunta Kinte is whipped, Ted jokes that he’s just like the brutalized slave. The joke is absurd, weird and unfunny, and it exemplifies Mr. MacFarlane’s reliance on surface shocks as well as his assumption that engaging with race is merely a matter of putting black people on-screen; or having a black woman “comically” explain the history of slavery; or having Ted and John repeatedly employ a vulgarism for black penises. It is a particularly blunt example of the white appropriation of black lives — except without all the bad stuff or, as the writer Greg Tate once put it, with “Mr. MacFarlane’s fixation on anatomy is especially striking and reaches its nadir in a scene at a sperm bank. There, John accidentally knocks over a shelving unit and ends up splashed with ejaculate that, a nurse explains, has been excluded because the donors have sickle cell anemia. As John writhes, Ted laughs. “You’re covered in rejected black guys’ sperm,” Ted says. “You’re like a Kardashian.” Mr. Wahlberg plays the moment with the right level of desperation, but Ted’s lines are depressing and desperate. The Kardashians are an easy target, as James Franco and Seth Rogen showed with their AdvertisementJokes don’t need to make you think, and comedy isn’t school, even if the Three Stooges have taught us much. It all depends on context, which is why some pokes in the eye are funny and others aren’t. And maybe this movie might have been funny (or at least tolerably wince-worthy) before dead black bodies again became an emblem of our national trauma. The audience I saw “Ted 2” with, though, seemed both uncomfortable with the Kardashian joke and unsure of how to respond, which was notable considering how pumped it had seemed before the movie. Some people laughed, some tittered nervously, some groaned. The uneasiness, I think, came from a deep, unsettled recognition that many of us share these days: No matter what we tell ourselves, we have not really figured out how to talk about race, much less joke about it. Mr. MacFarlane sure hasn’t.The Times critic Manohla Dargis reviews “Ted 2.”In “Ted 2,” he generates squirms, largely because his humor is so tone deaf. A Freudian might enjoy trying to figure out if his repeated references to black male genitalia represents a fear of black (male) power or something a wee more personal. And Mr. MacFarlane may believe that mechanically reciting words will drain them of their force, which superficially recalls Lenny Bruce’s idealistic claim that the repetitive use of a familiar racial slur would do the same. “The word’s suppression gives it the power,” Bruce said in 1962, “the violence, the viciousness.” History has proved otherwise, and the word, its violence and viciousness are still with us. I think that Mr. MacFarlane knows this, and that’s why he cast a few well-known black actors in authority roles, as if to signal, wink-wink, that the race stuff is just all in good fun.Advertisement“Ted 2” comes off as more inept and thoughtless than intentionally hateful. The charitable take is that Mr. MacFarlane wanted to take on race (slavery — lighten up, people!) but doesn’t have the skills to do so. Less charitably, he doesn’t have the mind-set, the compassion or actual interest. He wants to be an equal-opportunity insulter, which is impossible because there is no genuine equality, either on-screen or off. That doesn’t mean that race or black penises can’t be turned into comedy gold, as Mel Brooks figured out in “Blazing Saddles.”And this isn’t a question of political correctness, the default complaint of those who just want their critics to shut up. If anything, American comedies need to take on race more, to test boundaries and audiences alike. First, though, they have to grasp the differences between appropriation and engagement, and between comedy that supports the racist status quo and comedy that shreds it to pieces. Just sliming us doesn’t cut it.“Ted 2” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Vulgarities, bodily fluids and dope.





A version of this review appears in print on June 26, 2015, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;