Magic Mike XXL
5.7
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTAlone in his workshop one night, Mike Lane receives a visit from the muse. Though he’s still played by But then, as Mike burns the midnight oil amid T squares and two-by-fours, he catches a beat from the music playing in the background and starts to move. As the saying doesn’t quite go: You can take the dude out of the dance, but you can’t take the dance out of the dude. And so the audience watching The Times critic A. O. Scott reviews “Magic Mike XXL.”“Magic Mike,”It may have been the subtlety of the film’s critique of contemporary social conditions that made it a hit, or it may have been something else. In any case, success begets sequels, and the challenge facing “Magic Mike XXL” — similar to the one faced by “Pitch Perfect 2” — is how to manage enlarged expectations while remaining true to the scrappy, modest authenticity of the original.AdvertisementRather than trying to replay the first episode and expand on its themes, this installment tosses it all aside like a handyman’s tool belt and throws itself headlong into the intoxicating carnality of what is demurely called “male entertainment.” The plot is as flimsy as a G-string and thoroughly spoiler-proof. Mike reunites with some of his colleagues, and after a brief explanation of why Matthew McConaughey and Cody Horn are not in this movie, the guys roll out of Tampa, Fla., and head to a big stripper gathering in Myrtle Beach, S.C. That’s about it. On the way, they look up some old friends, make some new ones, drop some Molly, smoke some weed and take off their shirts.A road-trip story of a car-load of male strippers on their way to a stripper convention and all the adventures they have on the way.Even though flabbier viewers (I’m speaking hypothetically here) might experience a twinge of envy or shame at the display of chiseled pecs and sculpted quads, the spirit of “Magic Mike XXL” is buoyant and inclusive. Mike and his colleagues — Tarzan (Kevin Nash), Tito (Adam Rodriguez), Ken (Matt Bomer) and Richie (Joe Manganiello) — are disciplined professionals, servants of Terpsichore on a quest to refine their art. One of the film’s story lines involves each dancer’s struggle to free himself from the clichés of exotic dancing and find a more personal style of choreography. Ken is a New Age healer. Tarzan is an aspiring painter. Tito and Richie are shy, romantic souls in turbocharged bodies.AdvertisementBut it isn’t as if they’re about to go all Martha Graham on us. These guys are high priests of erotic delight, knights pledged to the service of an exalted ideal of female happiness. Their job is “to make women smile” — and also to make them scream, squirm and shower dancers with dollar bills — and the movie insists that this is a matter of chivalry, not sleaze. At a nightclub in Savannah, Ga., run by an old flame of Mike’s named Rome (You can argue with the film’s depiction of female desire, but it’s hard to quarrel with its exuberance and ingenuity. The dance numbers Embedded in the glitter and flesh are ideas about the human body that could fuel a dozen gender-studies dissertations. The guys are mostly straight, but to point out the homoerotic subtext of their friendship would be like discovering a red subtext on a fire engine. They find natural allies among cross-dressed nightclub performers and women who “work the pole.” At a beach party on the way to the big show, Mike befriends Zoe (Amber Heard), who is a possible romantic partner, a fellow artiste and a mirror image of who Mike was in the first movie. She wants to move away from stripping to concentrate on her photography, and he offers solidarity, a morale boost and a spectacularly broad shoulder to cry on.“Magic Mike XXL” boldly flouts pop-cultural conventional wisdom. It’s often said that an explanation of a joke can’t be funny, and that the analysis of pornography is never sexy. But here is a coherent and rigorous theory of pleasure that is also an absolute blast.“Magic Mike XXL” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Do you really need to ask why?





A version of this review appears in print on July 1, 2015, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;