Water for Elephants
6.9
AdvertisementBy STEPHEN HOLDEN“But the timid screen adaptation, directed by In With her caring trainer, Jacob Jankowski (AdvertisementThe monotonous tone is established early on with Jacob’s plodding narration, which takes over after an introduction by a rheumy-eyed Hal Holbrook (wonderful, as always), playing the aged Jacob. Mr. Pattinson’s simplistic narration, unfortunately, affects the gee-whiz language of a grade-school reading book. Each time his voice breaks in to advance the plot, the movie grinds to a halt. Mr. Pattinson is only partly to blame for the fatuity of a character who even in the novel is really a generic male ingénue with no personality. In the film there is nothing about him to suggest a Depression-era youth whose parents’ deaths have thrown him into the world without a safety net. He is more like a AdvertisementInstead of evoking a pungent vision of rough-and-tumble circus life in hard times, “Water for Elephants” concentrates on the explosive romantic triangle of the circus’s volatile owner, August (Christoph Waltz); his sultry, platinum-blond wife, Marlena (The romantic chemistry between It is left for Mr. Waltz to inject “Water for Elephants” with the little sense of danger it is able to muster. As the imperious, sadistic, furiously possessive August, he brings the same intensity that infused his Oscar-winning portrayal of Col. Hans Landa in Mr. Lawrence is so busy awkwardly jamming the novel’s minor events together and introducing (before dropping) colorful minor characters who have so little screen time that they barely register, that the movie fails to develop a sense of wonder. After all, what is a circus but a surreal pageant celebrating the animal side of human nature?Brief scenes of the circus arriving in a town and pitching its tent provide momentary jolts of realism, and you almost smell the manure that Jacob has to shovel during his apprenticeship and taste the rotten, fly-covered meat he is instructed to feed “the cats.” But overwhelmingly the movie seems perversely intent on being “nice.” Its musical wallpaper accompanies panoramic cinematography that soothes rather than catches the eye.As a piece of storytelling, the film displays its most disastrous choice when it makes the book’s climatic rampage seem perfunctory. This sloppily directed scene, which ends almost as soon as it begins, leaves you feeling cheated out of a necessary cathartic release.Where is Cecil B. DeMille when we need him, I wondered, as “Water for Elephants” drew to its dull, tidy conclusion.The film is so bland that it made me long for “Advertisement“Water for Elephants” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has mild sexual situations, some violence and strong language.WATER FOR ELEPHANTSOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on April 22, 2011, on Page C10 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;