The Big Short
7.8
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTA true crime story and a madcap comedy, a heist movie and a scalding polemic, “Written by Adam McKay (“Anchorman,” “Anchorman 2”) and Charles Randolph, and directed by Mr. McKay and released in the midst of “Star Wars” advent season, the film sets itself a very tall order. It wants not only to explain the financial crisis of 2008 — following the outline of Michael Lewis’s best-selling nonfiction Adam McKay narrates a sequence from “The Big Short.”It’s a trip. At the end, your brain hurts and you feel sick to your stomach, as can happen when too much adrenaline has been surging through your system. But that queasy, empty feeling is the point: This is a terrifically enjoyable movie that leaves you in a state of rage, nausea and despair. What is to be done with those feelings is the great moral and political challenge Mr. McKay has set for the audience, which I hope is vast and various. I don’t condone mob violence and I’m supposed to keep my political opinions to myself, but as soon as I’m done writing this I’m going out to the garage to look for a pitchfork.“The Big Short” is not the first movie to reckon with the fraud and stupidity that brought the world economy to the brink of collapse not so long ago and that continues to exact a heavy toll in social misery and political alienation. Charles Ferguson’s 2010 documentary “AdvertisementBack in 2010, when Mr. Lewis’s book came out, it was as ubiquitous an accessory for business-class airline passengers as the “Twilight” novels were for adolescent girls. Part of the book’s appeal — a side effect of its author’s smart, breezy, plain-spoken style — was that it offered readers the illusion of retroactive prescience. You could read about the insanity of bundling subprime mortgages into highly rated investment products and think: Well, of course that was a recipe for disaster. Of course a drop in the housing market would bring the whole thing crashing down like a Jenga tower. It was obvious. We knew it all along.The Times critic A.O. Scott reviews “The Big Short.”In fact, almost none of us did. Certainly not the government officials and banking executives who remain at liberty and in positions of power to this day. Or if they did know, they didn’t care. The truth about what the banks and their enablers were doing was obvious only to a handful of people (one of whom, in the movie, is shown demonstrating the Jenga tower metaphor I just borrowed). Mr. McKay, with a comedy writer’s eye for archetypes, sorts them into an amusing array of strongly defined characters.AdvertisementThere is the antisocial numbers guy, Dr. Michael Burry (Linking these motley iconoclasts, and serving as our guide to the apocalypse unfolding around them, is Jared Vennett, a silky cynic played, with all the seductiveness that has made him a beloved Internet When four outsiders saw what the big banks, media and government refused to - the global collapse of the economy - they had an idea: The Big Short.Which, to some extent, it is. Mr. McKay is not above using paid-for female nudity as a signifier of capitalist excess, nor acknowledging, more generally, the hedonistic aspects of greed. He is a naturally exuberant director, and his antic energy matches the rhythms of the story. The teams conspiring to short the market are impossible not to root for, and the work of the movie’s sprawling ensemble is never less than delightful. (This is the place to appreciate the contributions of Rafe Spall, Hamish Linklater and Jeremy Strong, who play Baum’s baffled minions; Adepero Oduye, who plays his liaison to the bank that houses his fund; and Marisa Tomei, who as Baum’s wife is like the only civilian in a combat picture.)But when we root for Baum and Burry to be proven right, for Shipley and Geller to hit pay dirt and for Vennett to earn the right to be smug in perpetuity, we are also hoping for ruin to be visited on millions of ordinary people. Houses, nest eggs, jobs and lives will be lost. Because, as we know — and as we can stand, from time to time, to be reminded — there is no happy ending to this story, no punishment for the crime. A movie is unlikely to change that, and “The Big Short,” in many ways a startlingly ambitious film, is modest about what it can do. It offers no solutions, and no comfort. The best it can do is put down a marker.“The Big Short” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). All that is solid melts into air; all that is holy is profaned. Running time: 2 hours 10 minutes.





A version of this review appears in print on December 11, 2015, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;