What Happens in Vegas
6.1
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGIS“What Happens in Vegas,” one of those junky time-wasters that routinely pop up in movie theaters, won’t make you laugh much or at all. (Once was enough for me.) But if you know anything about the art or have ever marveled at how even the most generic of old B movies look pretty good (they were usually in focus, for starters), you may wonder how a major studio like 20th Century Fox could release something this crudely manufactured, with its graceless setups, unstable lensing and ghastly lighting. It also makes you wonder if executives at studios look at dailies, much less can hear the poetry of the English language.The word dailies here refers to select material shot that day and viewed by certain crew members. Dailies can be projected as prints or watched on videotape or both, but are now often digital and displayed on monitors, which may affect quality control. Because, unless you’re David Fincher and a genius, or an obsessive-compulsive, it may be easier to ignore your mistakes when they look like specks on a computer monitor. Or as Robert Elswit, the cinematographer for Paul Thomas Anderson’s This digression may seem off the point of “What Happens in Vegas,” but because its director, Though it’s more sitcom than romcom, “What Happens in Vegas” recycles a plot — a separated couple reunite — that will be familiar to anyone who’s had the pleasure of watching films like AdvertisementShe knows, and we do too, having been given a glimpse of that happily ever after in the rat-a-tat of the couple’s wisecracking romancing. There are no wisecracks in Dana Fox’s screenplay for “What Happens in Vegas,” just insults, yucky yuks (“I threw up in my purse”) and exposition. The couple, strangers who marry during a Vegas drunk and stay together to hold on to a fat casino payout, enter without a shared history or much personality. They learn to live as a couple through mutual abuse and pranks: he removes the toilet seat, and she solicits some “sluts” to tempt him into contract-breaking infidelity. The cynicism about human beings (us included) reeks as much as the filmmaking.“What Happens in Vegas” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). May induce headaches.WHAT HAPPENS IN VEGASOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page E17 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;