Police Academy 6: City Under Siege
4.1
LEAD: Devotees of the five previous installments of the endless ''Police Academy'' series will probably like this new one. It has a few good gags and the same energetic, spirited silliness of its predecessors. But if you have found the others to be more predictable than clever, this new one, subtitled ''City Under
Devotees of the five previous installments of the endless ''Police Academy'' series will probably like this new one. It has a few good gags and the same energetic, spirited silliness of its predecessors. But if you have found the others to be more predictable than clever, this new one, subtitled ''City Under Siege,'' won't make you a fan.

The highly profitable ''Police Academy'' idea, of course, is a technologically and culturally updated variation on the Keystone Cops of yesteryear. These more recent bunglers not only trip over their own shoelaces, they also get suspended upside down from a window washer's platform several dozen stories up the side of a modern skyscraper. They sit in their police cars on stakeouts while a robbery of a fur store takes place conspicuously behind them. They even resort to the old collapsed-chair routine, varying it with the glue-on-the-chair gag, not to mention the back-the-car-into-traffic trick.

There are some witty moments, as when the straight man, Proctor, played as usual by Lance Kinsey, uses a squeaky rubber squeegie to wash a window while his partner, Harris (G. W. Bailey), holds a stethoscope to the window to eavesdrop on a conversation taking place on the other side. But most of what takes place in ''Police Academy 6,'' from the flying billiard balls to the exploding cigars, are things you have seen someplace before.

Even though Steve Guttenberg dropped out of the cast the last time around, most of the other regular members are still present. Besides Bubba Smith as Hightower, who subdues an ostensibly comic man mountain called Ox (Darwyn Swalve) after the latter tells a bad joke, there is Michael Winslow, who gives a highly creditable stand-up comic performance that might prefigure a future career for him if the series ever comes to an end. Kenneth Mars is intermittently funny and obvious as the Mayor of the big city where a certain Wilson Heights Gang is carrying out a wave of robberies.

Last time the team ended up in the Everglades; this time, the denouement comes in a car chase scene in which a truck elevated on balloon tires rolls atop dozens of cars caught in traffic. They didn't wreck on such a scale in the Keystone Cops, but the idea of lunatic police rolls on forever. 
LAW AND DISORDER 
POLICE ACADEMY 6: CITY UNDER SIEGE, directed by Peter Bonerz; written by Stephen J. Curwick, based on characters created by Neal Israel and Pat Proft; director of photography, Charles Rosher Jr.; edited by Hubert de la Bouillerie; music by Robert Folk; production designer, Tho E. Azzari; produced by Paul Maslansky; released by Warner Brothers. At the Criterion Center, Broadway at 45th Street; Loews 84th Street Six, at Broadway, and other theaters. Running time: 87 minutes. This film is rated PG. 
Hightower . . . Bubba Smith 
Tackleberry . . . David Graf 
Jones . . . Michael Winslow 
Callahan . . . Leslie Easterbrook 
Captain Harris . . . G. W. Bailey 
Hooks . . . Marion Ramsey 
Proctor . . . Lance Kinsey 
Mayor . . . Kenneth Mars 
Nick . . . Matt McCoy 
Ox . . . Darwyn Swalve