Primal Fear
7.7
Back from "First Knight" and the Dark Ages, Richard Gere has a tailor-made role in "Primal Fear," which casts him as a slick Chicago lawyer. Mr. Gere does  a solid job of turning Martin Vail, a dashing, self-satisfied legal hotshot, into a character audiences will love to hate. "When your mother says she loves you, ask for a second opinion," Martin tells a reporter who interviews him, smiling seductively as he dresses for a black-tie evening. "This is a cover story, right?" 

     Martin flaunts his success and usually enjoys finding himself in the headlines.  However, what "Primal Fear" has in store for him are headlines worthy of a supermarket tabloid, since it involves voyeuristic sex, the grisly hacking murder of an archbishop and a suspect whose problems go beyond Martin's  areas of expertise. As an assistant of Martin's says, without too much exaggeration: "This kid doesn't need a lawyer. He needs an exorcist." 
As soon as he has seen television reports of the killing, Martin races to jail and appropriates the case of Aaron Stampler, the scared young man found fleeing the scene of the crime. Aaron (played with subtle cleverness by Edward Norton, in a debut to remember) is so shy and uncertain that he brings out the unexpected in Martin. This is the old tale of the cynic who suddenly finds himself shamed into seriousness by the purity of another person. Or at least it  looks that way for a while. 

     Adapted from William Diehl's novel (part of a trilogy about Martin Vail) by Steve Shagan and Ann Biderman, "Primal Fear" relies on many more old ideas than  that. Pared down to a farfetched plot and paper-thin motives, the story relies on an overload of tangential subplots to keep it looking busy. There is an earlier case of Martin's, involving a Hispanic community leader (Steven Bauer).  There is the psychiatrist (Frances McDormand) studying Aaron's textbook-worthy symptoms. There is the State's Attorney (John Mahoney) whose close ties to the archbishop give him a more than passing interest in the case. 

     And there is Janet Venable (Laura Linney), who once had an affair with Martin and now becomes his courtroom adversary. Sparks are meant to fly between these two, but the film doesn't make much of their romantic potential. Instead, the trial scenes concentrate on careful hairdressing and dueling Armani wardrobes, not to mention occasional dramatic revelations, which are greeted by loud gasps  from the crowd. Alfre Woodard presides nicely as a seasoned, fashionable judge.  Michael Chapman's cinematography gives the whole film a polished look. 

     The director, Gregory Hoblit, has had a substantial Emmy-winning television career (his credits include the "L.A. Law" pilot and episodes of "N.Y.P.D. Blue") and sticks to a television style for his first feature. If that means glossy storytelling and one-note insights into character, it also means a good deal of surface charm. Mr. Hoblit also turns the film's closing revelation into  one of its better selling points. 

     It is a surprise here to realize that Mr. Gere could easily play Martin Vail  on a weekly basis, so comfortably does he fit into this engaging role. The film's most ingratiating scenes are those of Martin bantering with his staff members, showing off sardonic humor and debonair style. "Tommy," he tells a detective (played sturdily by Andre Braugher), "you're going to have to try harder to get the word allegedly into your vocabulary, especially if you want to be a lawyer." 

     Intense jail-house scenes between Mr. Gere and Mr. Norton also generate heat, though Mr. Hoblit lets them run on too long. (At 2 hours 10 minutes, the whole film would have been helped by some tightening.) And there's energy to the sparring between Mr. Gere and Ms. Linney, although their characters' past history hardly makes sense. He is supposed to have been too rakish and skirt-chasing to get along with any one woman. Yet the film rarely shows him doing anything bolder than nursing a bottle of mineral water or insinuating himself beside Ms. Linney and whispering "Wanna dance?" 

  "Primal Fear" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It includes an excerpt from a pornographic videotape and glimpses of  a brutal killing. 

  PRIMAL FEAR 

  Directed by Gregory Hoblit; written by Steve Shagan and Ann Biderman, based on the novel by William Diehl; director of photography, Michael Chapman; edited by  David Rosenbloom; music by James Newton Howard; production designer, Jeannine Oppewall; produced by Gary Lucchesi; released by Paramount Pictures. Running time: 130 minutes. This film is rated R. 

  WITH: Richard Gere (Martin Vail), Laura Linney (Janet Venable), John Mahoney (John Shaughnessy), Alfre Woodard (Judge Miriam Shoat), Frances McDormand (Dr. Molly Arrington) and Edward Norton (Aaron Stampler) 
