Focus
6.6
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTA silky high-end caper about a pair of good-looking con artists, “Mostly, it is fun to watch A scene from the film.Which implies that Ms. Robbie, recently seen in “And so he becomes her mentor and her boss, hiring her onto a crew he has organized to harvest wallets, credit card numbers and jewelry in New Orleans. They also become lovers, which would probably raise some red flags if Nicky’s criminal enterprise had a human resources department. Professional ethics are a minor concern, though there is the usual talk about honor among thieves and some chin-scratching about whether a man and a woman who lie and cheat for a living can ever really love or trust each other.But “Focus” is not the kind of movie that uses an underworld setting to explore the complexities of human behavior. It’s not quite Elmore Leonard for Dummies — maybe more like Carl Hiaasen for Shallow People. Which is no terrible thing. Glenn Ficarra and At times the Nicky-Jess romance spins its wheels or grows a bit too languorous. Attractive as they are, their emotional drama is weightless. Thank goodness, then, for a squad of supporting players who exist partly to propel the plot but mostly to say and do funny, unpredictable things. There is BD Wong as an enthusiastic gambler Jess and Nicky meet at the Superdome; Adrian Martinez as Nicky’s sidekick; and Robert Taylor as an Australian racecar owner. Above all, there is He provides some comic ballast, and Mr. Smith’s sad eyes and whispery line readings stand in for a missing dramatic core. The heart of the movie — its focus, if you want — is not love but luxury. It sells a vision of cool defined by beautiful stuff and the beautiful people who steal it. The brief sex scenes carry some heat, but far more voluptuous are the slow pans over rows of watches and stacks of cash. It’s a vision of the good life familiar to readers of “Focus” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Major Dad! That was Major Dad using all those bad words!





A version of this review appears in print on February 27, 2015, on Page C6 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;