The Host
5.9
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe Times critic Manohla Dargis reviews "The Host."Around 2006, the year her second “Twilight” book hit, Stephenie Meyer Robert Pattinson, who played Edward in the “Twilight” movies, is a pale, phlegmatic beauty similar to those in the work of Set in Genericville, U.S.A., “The Host” takes place after an alien race, the Souls, has transformed most of the human population into smiling peaceniks, like a nation of hospitality workers. Some humans, like Melanie (Dopey, derivative and dull, “The Host” is a brazen combination of unoriginal science-fiction themes, young-adult pandering and bottom-line calculation. That sounds like it should work (really!), but it never does, largely because the story is as drained of energy as are its moony aliens. Ms. Ronan and some special contact lenses spook up the Wanderer (renamed Wanda), but the alien’s serenity is a dreary liability. And the split-personality squabbles within Melanie generate no tension, even when each character sets sights on a different slab of male prime. The only real fun comes from bushwhacking through the movie’s thicket of influences and commercial imperatives and marveling at its weird combination of “Twilight”-like chaste romance, Cronenberg-lite The movie winds down to a crawl not long after Melanie/Wanda settles into the refuge (utopias tend to be bores), but Ms. Ronan keeps on trucking. With her clear, steady gaze and a physical bearing and gestural style that feel highly disciplined, she has always come across as preternaturally mature. There’s an almost otherworldly aspect to her screen presence, partly due to her stillness and her own translucent eyes, which can suggest grave intensity or utter detachment. She may turn into another Cate Blanchett.For now, though, Ms. Ronan, who turns 19 next month, just has to prove that she is smoothly transitioning to adulthood and ready for the corresponding roles, which, for a young woman in American movies means she has to demonstrate sex appeal and kiss some guys. Ms. Ronan does. She’s ready.Advertisement“The Host” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Gun violence and bloody wounds.





Schedule information and a listing of credits on Friday with a film review of &#8220;The Host&#8221; misstated the running time. It is 2 hours 5 minutes, not 2 hours 25 minutes.A version of this review appears in print on March 29, 2013, on Page C9 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;