Monsters University
7.3
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe Times critic Manohla Dargis reviews "Monsters University."What are little boy monsters made of? In Pixar’s Scarers are the heroic frighteners who, by traveling through literal doors into the human world, are able to terrify children, inspiring the kiddie screams that literally light up the monsters’ world. Among the greatest Scarers is Mike’s B.F.F., the mighty Sulley, a k a James P. Sullivan (John Goodman), a mammoth teal fur ball adorned with violet spots, horns and claws and the serrated tail of a stegosaurus, who is basically the Bing Crosby to Mike’s fast-talking, schtick-slinging Bob Hope. In “Monsters, Inc.” their Directed by Boys will be boys, including, alas, in Pixar movies. This is the studio’s 14th animated feature, and while it’s a visual enchantment (there’s a knockout compendium of horror film clichés), its reversion to a largely male domain after AdvertisementThe relationship between Mike and Sulley unfolds within the established genre confines of a college movie, with fraternities like Roar Omega Roar (ROR) and its president, a strutting big monster on campus, Johnny Worthington (Nathan Fillion). Although mostly undifferentiated on a character level, the sororities’ sisters come in three colors and character types, including the three-eyed members of Python Nu Kappa (PNK), who wear pink, smiles that turn to scowls and the kind of flip hairdo AdvertisementSulley appears slated for a ROR letter jacket, while Mike ends up in loser land with Oozma Kappa (OK). The usual oddball assortment of soft and squishy geeks and freaks, the OK dudes shake and quake as Mike resists their charms and fights for their right to be Scarers. There are testy tiffs and life lessons, a runaway mascot, a duplicitous roommate (Steve Buscemi, reprising his role as Randy), witty flourishes and clever setups, including a tiptoe challenge in a library policed by a shushing colossus — one of the few female characters to register, along with the slithery Dean Hardscrabble (Helen Mirren) and the snaggletooth president of the Greek Council (Aubrey Plaza). Other characters are voiced by the likes of Sean P. Hayes, Dave Foley, Alfred Molina and John Krasinski.The voices are pleasantly recognizable, and the details meticulously playful, like the jagged, teethlike contours of a building’s arched entrance. But the story remains disappointingly familiar, mired in recycled buddy movie dynamics and the usual child-developmental directives about finding yourself and learning to work well with others. Both the originality and stirring emotional complexity of “Monsters, Inc.,” with its exquisitely painful and touching parallels with the human world, are missing, which might be a lot less noticeable if Pixar had taken some bold leaps elsewhere: like making a movie in which girls and women are as central to the story as the boys and men of Pixar, as crucial as Mike and Sulley, Nemo and Marlin, Andy and Buzz and the other creatures great and small and male.“Monsters University” is rated G (General audiences). Some gentle scares.





A version of this review appears in print on June 21, 2013, on Page C12 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;