Untitled
4.9
AdvertisementBy STEPHEN HOLDENJonathan Parker’s acutely witty art-world satire, “(Untitled),” carries off a tricky balancing act. It invites us to view the fictitious avant-garde musicians, visual artists, gallery owners, collectors and critics trooping across the screen as fraudulent, self-deluded buffoons. But at the same time it takes these visionary oddballs — and the art they make, buy and sell — seriously enough to force you to examine your own reflexive skepticism.Its teasingly paradoxical attitude is personified by Adrian Jacobs (Adam Goldberg), a brooding, bearded composer whose cacophonous ensemble pieces for his trio, New Sound Ensemble, involve dropping chains into a bucket and kicking it, shredding paper, popping bubble wrap and smashing wine glasses. These silly pieces, as well as some of the film’s more musically substantial ones, were written by the Adrian, who supports himself playing Chopin in a wine bar where the piano competes with ringing cellphones, believes he is an unsung genius. Grandiose and humorless, he warns his brother, Josh (Eion Bailey), that if he hasn’t achieved recognition in three years, he will commit suicide.The role is a perfect fit for Mr. Goldberg, who in films like AdvertisementA continuing thorn in his side is the commercial success of Josh, a painter, whose blandly pretty canvases decorate corporate offices and hospitals around the country. You can imagine how Adrian feels when his father calls Josh a genius, then growls to Adrian, “I only hope you know what you’re doing.”AdvertisementBecause “(Untitled),” whose screenplay was written by Mr. Parker and Catherine di Napoli, is more interested in poking fun at the aesthetics and business of art than in exploring the relationships among its high-strung characters, it shies away from probing the deeper ramifications of what looks to be a potentially lethal sibling rivalry. While it poses aesthetic questions, psychologically it stays on the surface. There is little story to speak of.Adrian is infuriated by the success of Josh, whose kitschy paintings keep the Chelsea gallery of his dealer, Madeleine Gray (Marley Shelton), afloat. Josh, despite his success, craves the reputation of a serious artist that only an exhibition in the gallery’s front room might confer. But Madeleine, who doesn’t respect his work, refuses; he doesn’t need it, she insists disingenuously.When Josh brings Madeleine to Adrian’s concert, she is the only person in the nearly empty hall who responds positively to the music. Afterward she suggests that her gallery might be a more appropriate place for the trio and invites the musicians to perform there as “sound artists.”She also throws herself at Adrian, and they begin a secret affair. One sign that they are simpatico is that Madeleine wears chic noise-making clothes whose crackle is similar to sounds made by Adrian’s group. Ms. Shelton, her eyes popping behind fake prescription glasses, gives a bright screwball performance that recalls the frisky young Diane Keaton.Once the focus shifts from the concert hall to the gallery, “(Untitled)” spoofs an avant-garde tradition that goes back at least as far as Marcel Duchamp’s urinal. One of Madeleine’s stars, Ray Barko (Vinnie Jones), makes taxidermy pieces that were executed for the movie by the Los Angeles artist Kyle Ng. They include a chandelier with stuffed animals, a monkey inhaling a vacuum-cleaner tube and a cow draped with jewelry.We also meet Monroe (Ptolemy Slocum), a self-loathing conceptual artist whose works have self-explanatory titles like “Pushpin Stuck Into Wall” and “A Rubber Door Stop Partially Obscuring a Door.” The movie also lampoons critical jargon (“thematic content was pedestrian and the performance was anemic”) and collectors’ doubletalk.If “(Untitled)” shrewdly hedges its bets about the value of it all, it is ultimately on the side of experimental music and art and their champions, no matter how eccentric. For that alone this brave little movie deserves an audience.(UNTITLED)Opens on Friday in New York and Los Angeles. Directed by Jonathan Parker; written by Mr. Parker and Catherine di Napoli; director of photography, Svetlana Cvetko; music by David Lang; production designer, David L. Snyder; produced by Ms. di Napoli and Andreas Olavarria; released by Samuel Goldwyn Films. In Manhattan at the Angelika Film Center, Mercer and Houston Streets, Greenwich Village. Running time: 1 hour 36 minutes. This film is not rated.AdvertisementWITH: Adam Goldberg (Adrian Jacobs), Marley Shelton (Madeleine Gray), Eion Bailey (Josh Jacobs), Lucy Punch (the Clarinet), Vinnie Jones (Ray Barko), Ptolemy Slocum (Monroe) and Zak Orth (Porter Canby).





A version of this review appears in print on October 23, 2009, on Page C6 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;