We Need to Talk About Kevin
7.5
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTT“Every parent’s nightmare” would be the evening news boilerplate description of But the vividness of its effects makes the film very much a particular parent’s nightmare, pitched at the extreme boundary of everyday anxieties. Her character, Eva Khatchadourian, is too complicated for pity, projecting a mixture of cold poise and extreme vulnerability that makes her predicament especially awful. We watch as she loses everything except her dignity, but it is precisely that noble, steely pride that places her just beyond the range of a sympathy that she would most likely refuse, in any case. “We Need to Talk About Kevin,” though it evokes real-life atrocities like the 1999 Columbine school shootings, is less a psychological or sociological case study than a horror movie, a variant on the bad-seed narrative that feeds on a primal (and seldom acknowledged) fear of children. What if they turn out wrong? What if we can’t love them? What if they refuse to love us? These worries are rarely dealt with in the child-rearing manuals, but they hover over modern nurseries like the ghosts of ancient fairy-tale curses.AdvertisementEva, a travel writer who once enjoyed a life of free-wheeling Bohemian bliss — we catch glimpses of her in ecstasy at religious festivals in India and at ease in picturesque European cities — is brought down to earth by pregnancy and motherhood. With her amiable, practical husband, Franklin (John C. Reilly), she abandons a downtown loft for a house in the suburbs and sacrifices her wanderlust on the altar of responsibility.AdvertisementDoes her son appreciate the sacrifice? That can hardly be expected, but little Kevin (played in toddlerhood by Rock Duer and latency by Jasper Newell) has been born with a filial ingratitude sharper than any serpent’s tooth. More than that, he possesses, from infancy, an active and demonic hostility toward his mother. His incessant crying when he is in Eva’s care comes to seem like the opening salvo in a long campaign to wreck her happiness and destroy her peace of mind.He refuses to be toilet trained well into middle childhood, messes up her most precious possessions and quietly sows seeds of discord between Eva and Franklin. The arrival of a younger sister (Ashley Gerasimovich), far from easing the tension in the family, only gives Kevin new opportunities to show what a manipulative little sociopath he can be.The adolescent Kevin is played by The film shuttles back and forth between Eva’s life in the aftermath of Kevin’s crime — when she is alone and in disgrace, shunned and abused by the people she had never wanted to live among in the first place — and the events that led up to it. Horror movies tend to be relentlessly linear, moving in a crescendo of suspense that grows out of our panicked curiosity about what will happen next. Ms. Ramsay, with ruthless ingenuity, creates a deeper dread and a more acute feeling of anticipation by allowing us to think we know what is coming and then shocking us with the extent of our ignorance.There is a measure of sadism in this method, to be sure, but also a lot of craft. In her previous features, “We Need to Talk About Kevin,” with help from Seamus McGarvey’s fever-flushed cinematography and Jonny Greenwood’s heartsick, throbbing score, saturates the senses like illness or bad weather. It is beautiful and demonic, like Kevin himself, and the bad feelings it induces are likely to be accompanied by helpless and stricken admiration. You may well need to talk about it afterward, but then again, you may be left speechless.“We Need to Talk About Kevin” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Language and intense violence.WE NEED TO TALK ABOUT KEVINOpens on Friday in Manhattan. Directed by WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on December 9, 2011, on Page C11 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;