The Amazing Spider-Man 2
6.7
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe Times critic Manohla Dargis reviews “The Amazing Spider-Man 2.”The last time Spider-Man swung into sight, it was to fight a lizard man in a lab coat and cozy up to a living doll. The lizard landed in the clink, but the doll, Gwen Stacy, is back for the good of Spider-Man (This may be the wettest superhero since Aquaman splashed through the HBO show “Entourage.” Then again, Spider-Man, a.k.a. Peter Parker, created at Marvel by Stan Lee and Mr. Garfield, who’s making a career out of playing delicate flowers, fits the role, suit and moist sniffling fine. He’s a stronger, more restrained actor, as well as a better crier, than Tobey Maguire, who had the role in the three films directed by Sam Raimi (the first one hit in 2002), before the “amazing” sobriquet was tagged on. Resurrected just five years after Mr. Raimi’s final installment, the reborn franchise did the job, “won” the opening weekend, placated the fans. Directed by Marc Webb, whose one other feature was A scene from the film directed by Marc Webb.It seems axiomatic that the superhero costume is more important than the actor filling it, and that’s true to an extent, although perhaps only for comic-book die-hards and movie executives. For the rest of us, talent matters, as demonstrated by the chasm separating the “Dark Knight” films and failed adaptations like AdvertisementOnce he comes down to earth, though, the movie does, too, with scenes of heavy destruction that quickly grow monotonous. Many of these involve Oscorp, the evil corporation that symbolizes dehumanizing capitalism (kidding!) and that breeds yet another unhappy employee turned monster turned Spider-Man foe, Max Dillon, a.k.a. Electro (Jamie Foxx). Their first big blowout, in the AdvertisementThat world, according to the screenwriters Alex Kurtzman, Roberto Orci and Jeff Pinkner, who share story credit with James Vanderbilt, has an almost rhythmic predictability: Spider-Man fights a villain; Peter hangs with family and friends; repeat. Fans will note canonical details, like the Ravencroft Institute for the Criminally Insane, while civilians may find themselves comparing Mr. Webb’s directorial signature is most evident in Peter’s intimate scenes with Gwen, Harry and Aunt May (Sally Field), which have a natural intimacy that can make this superhero movie feel unusually grounded in real life. These scenes warm up the movie, but they take a toll, because, like innumerable other male heroes, super and not, Peter has difficulty straddling the domestic sphere and the world beyond. In some action movies, that can be a source of humor, if often at the expense of the little lady impatiently tapping her foot while her guy saves the world. Such is the case in a scene in which Peter answers a call from Gwen while in the midst of a melee.It’s an amusing moment but disappointing. Gwen deserves better: She’s too appealing and crucial to the series to be the subject of mockery, including her boyfriend’s. It isn’t necessarily Mr. Webb’s fault, but the scene serves as a brief, irksome reminder that most women in the big comic-book movies continue to be consigned to supporting roles, and especially antediluvian ones, good for ogling and saving and not much more. Gwen is actually more interesting. That’s because, unlike some other superhero stories in which godlike heroes live and love among ordinary folk, Peter remains a strongly human presence. As a superhero, he carries impossible weight on his slim shoulders, but it’s life itself that presses down on him with its burdening guilt, regret and sorrow.That’s part of what keeps “The Amazing Spider-Man 2” moving nicely, at least until a late, badly handled turn for the grim. This blunt, uncharacteristically violent development is true to the source material, but it’s a bummer and a blown opportunity, both narratively and in terms of how the male and female characters work. Filmmakers who adapt beloved texts are invariably criticized, no matter what they do, and that’s particularly true of superhero movies, because the fans exert such claims on the material. There’s something amusing about the corporate owner of a superhero brand being held near-hostage by the love of the comic-book true believer, yet it’s hard not to think that this fanatical love can be as creatively inhibiting as the company bottom line.Visionary filmmakers like Christopher Nolan take their movies where they want, and if the results are strong enough, please buffs and agnostics. Mr. Webb seems to have been hired mostly to keep Sony’s Spider machine going, a tricky task, given that the character doesn’t have the mythic grandeur and gravity that make Batman and Superman seem endlessly exploitable. Peter is a superhero, but he’s also another mopey teenager. Rhys Ifans, who appeared in “The Amazing Spider-Man,” has “The Amazing Spider-Man 2” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). The movie has the usual largely bloodless violence and includes a death that may be too intense for some younger viewers.





A version of this review appears in print on May 2, 2014, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;