The Nutty Professor
5.6
In "The Nutty Professor," Eddie Murphy makes his overdue comeback -- with a vengeance. Thanks to the mind-boggling morphing and makeup effects that are the  film's impressive highlight, Mr. Murphy is able to become Sherman Klump, a shy,  gentle 400-pound lonely guy. It's an amazing transformation, and Mr. Murphy handles it with real skill. Instead of merely clowning, he becomes a warm, fully formed character, unrecognizable as the old Eddie Murphy unless you look straight into his eyes. 

     Mr. Murphy proves himself a surprisingly strong actor here, playing Sherman with sweetness and poignancy, not to mention loads of funny weight-related humor. (When he writes on the top part of a blackboard, his stomach accidentally erases what is below. More memorable than the gag itself is Sherman's profound embarrassment, which he hides behind nervous, jolly laughter and a too-pleasant  smile.) 
The illusion is so effective that it's doubly shocking when Sherman drinks a  special potion and becomes a thin, loud and nasty alter ego named Buddy Love. Buddy is as boorish as Sherman was kind. And when he appears, he changes "The Nutty Professor" into a much more mean-spirited movie, one that owes as much to  Jim Carrey as to Jerry Lewis. Mr. Lewis, an executive producer here, was the star and director of the more innocent 1963 Jekyll-Hyde comedy that has now been remade in rude, raunchy 90's style. 

     The influence of Mr. Carrey (whose "Ace Ventura: Pet Detective" was directed  by Tom Shadyac, also the director of "The Nutty Professor") is apparent in the manic, angry humor that spews out of the newly empowered Buddy Love. As in "The  Mask," a timid loser suddenly finds himself able to get (and insult) women, drive a flashy car, show off his crazily hopped-up energy and make more noise than anyone else in the room. This sourness throws the film out of kilter, despite Mr. Murphy's abundant talent and the fiery gusto with which he plays Buddy. He can be just as funny -- funnier, in fact -- when he isn't being this mean. 

     Unlike most Jekyll-Hyde stories, this "Nutty Professor" doesn't make much of  a connection between its two warring characters. And since they never seem to be aspects of the same person, there's nothing much at stake except the question of just how far Mr. Murphy will push his comic luck. Among the film's most raucous  episodes (and its most incredible visual tricks) are the dinner scenes in which  Mr. Murphy plays all the members of the Klump family except for one little boy,  who is reduced to helpless laughter by his relatives' loud flatulence. Children  in the audience may howl, too, but be warned that Grandma Klump (like Buddy Love) talks much dirtier than the PG-13 rating might lead parents to expect. 

     The best of "The Nutty Professor" echoes the anything-goes visual comedy of "Ace Ventura," as when Sherman tries acupuncture to lose weight and winds up stuck with more needles than a porcupine. Another gag finds it raining hamsters  after Sherman, who's too big to keep track of his own bulk, accidentally unlocks the lab animals' cages. One of Sherman's nightmares also finds him growing as big as Godzilla and terrorizing an entire city. In the film's most extended bit  of hostile comedy, Sherman becomes the butt of jokes made by an insulting comedian (Dave Chappelle), and he carries a grudge. As Buddy, he returns to avenge himself by delivering his own savage gags, eventually roughing up the comedian and throwing him into a piano. 

     Also in "The Nutty Professor," in the role Stella Stevens played opposite Mr. Lewis, is Jada Pinkett as the pretty young woman the professor fears he can never win. Ms. Pinkett is poised and appealing even when the film is joking, with typical coarseness, about whether Sherman's breasts are bigger than hers. 


  "The Nutty Professor" is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Some of its episodes hinge on mile-a-minute obscenities and raw sexual references. 

  THE NUTTY PROFESSOR 

  Directed by Tom Shadyac; written by David Sheffield, Barry W. Blaustein, Mr. Shadyac and Steve Oedekerk, based on the motion picture written by Jerry Lewis and Bill Richmond; director of photography, Julio Macat; edited by Don Zimmerman; music by David Newman; production designer, William Elliott; produced by Brian Grazer and Russell Simmons; released by Universal Pictures. Running time: 95 minutes. This film is rated PG-13. 

  WITH: Eddie Murphy (Sherman Klump, Buddy Love, Lance Perkins, Papa Klump, Mama Klump and Ernie Klump), Dave Chappelle (Reggie Warrington), Jada Pinkett (Carla  Purty), James Coburn (Harlan Hartley), Larry Miller (Dean Richmond) and John Ales (Jason). 
