John Carter
6.6
Advertisement A.&#160;O. SCOTTThe cast of Messy and chaotic, in other words, but also colorful and kind of fun. The movie begins in an atmosphere of Victorian spookiness: an old manse with dark paneling, a sealed tomb out back and many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten lore piled up in the study. In the blink of an eye we’re in Arizona Territory just after the That would be John Carter himself (A Civil War rages between two factions of Red Men, though it is actually the green, four-armed humanoids known as Tharks who serve the traditional western function of Indians, Noble Savages trying to fight back against a technologically superior foe. The war between the city-states of Helium and Zodanga is more like something out of Which I would be happy to quote at length, if my spellchecker didn’t keep decorating Martian words with squiggly red lines. The bodies and faces of the non-Thark Martians, by the way, are adorned with many such lines, though their blood is literally blue. I would also be glad to elaborate further on the intricacies of Martian culture and biology, except that a) I can’t read the notes I took while wearing 3-D glasses; and b) none of it makes much sense anyway.AdvertisementAnd that is just fine. Edgar Rice Burroughs was not J. R. R. Tolkien, or even J. K. Rowling. He was less concerned with constructing a coherent fantasy world than with stringing together as many sensational adventures as he could, and Mr. Stanton (who wrote the screenplay with Mark Andrews and Michael Chabon) follows his example.Carter, stripped of his shirt and endowed with extraordinary leaping ability (something to do with gravity), befriends some noble Tharks (voiced by Willem Dafoe and Samantha Morton), acquires a loyal Martian “monster dog” and falls in love with a Heliumese (Heliumian?) princess named Dejah Thoris (Lynn Collins), who is both a fierce sword fighter and a big shot at the Helium Academy of Science.There is more. There is nothing but more: a huge cast, soaring digital architecture, creatures both adorable and fearsome, lines of dialogue (“Thurns are a myth!”) made even more ridiculous by being uttered in earnest. The silliness — much of which is clearly intentional — is blended with some genuine grandeur.The Pixar touch is evident in the precision of the visual detail and in the wit and energy of Michael Giacchino’s score, but the quality control that has been exercised over this project also has a curiously undermining effect. The movie eagerly sells itself as semitrashy, almost-campy fun, but it is so lavish and fussy that you can’t help thinking that it wants to be taken seriously, and therefore you laugh at, rather than with, its mock sublimity.This may be a sign of the times, and a problem of scale. “John Carter” tries to evoke, to reanimate, a fondly recalled universe of B-movies, pulp novels and boys’ adventure magazines. But it pursues this modest goal according to blockbuster logic, which buries the easy, scrappy pleasures of the old stuff in expensive excess. A bad movie should not look this good.“John Carter” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Much Martian blood (blue and otherwise) 





A version of this review appears in print on March 9, 2012, on Page C6 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;