Total Recall
7.5
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTIn the future according to “Total Recall” — the new version, not the 1990 movie with the same name and the same alleged source in a Philip K. Dick story — Earth has been devastated by chemical warfare, leaving only two populated areas connected by a tunnel through the planet’s core. On one end of the chute, known as the Fall, is a sleek successor to Britain, an imperial metropole that exploits the teeming, watery Colony (Australia with elements of futuristic Hong Kong and Bangkok) down below.This premise contains the seeds of an interesting economic and political allegory, but the ambitions of the filmmakers — Len Wiseman directed a script by Kurt Wimmer and Mark Bomback — lie in the direction of maximum noise and minimum sense. The movie has a lot of chasing, shouting and fighting, carried out in crowded, overscale frames without much regard for either action-film effectiveness or narrative coherence. So much information is thrown at you in such a haphazard fashion that your ability to care dwindles along with your willingness to enjoy any of it.Douglas Quaid, a Colony-dwelling proletarian who commutes via the Fall to his factory job, is haunted by strange dreams and is played by The New York Times film critics on “Celeste &amp; Jesse Forever,” “You’ve Been Trumped,” and “Total Recall.”Why all the running? Quaid may not be the working stiff he thinks he is but rather a superagent of some kind mixed up in the ongoing struggle between the authoritarian Chancellor Cohaagen (Bryan Cranston of AMC’s “Breaking Bad”) and the shadowy leader of the resistance (Bill Nighy). Don’t get too excited about those names. Mr. Cranston appears to be trying for an odd kind of career balance, as if starring in one of the best shows on television obliged him to take supporting roles in some of the worst movies in theaters. And he doesn’t really do much except sneer sadistically and look plausible with hair. Mr. Nighy does even less.The 1990 “Total Recall,” directed by Paul Verhoeven at the apex of his Hollywood credibility (after Why bother with an update? A parallel-universe (or wishful-thinking) answer would be that Advertisement“Total Recall” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has action violence, brief nudity and swearing, though more of that is likely to come from Philip K. Dick fans in the audience.





A version of this review appears in print on August 3, 2012, on Page C9 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;