August: Osage County
7.3
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTThe Times critic A. O. Scott reviews "August: Osage County."Sam Shepard kicks off the screen adaptation of Beverly’s disappearance sets in motion an especially loud and rambunctious variation on a tried-and-true theme. You’ve seen it before, in plays and indie movies and holiday episodes of your favorite televisions shows. An extended clan descends on the old home place to bicker, reminisce, air long-hidden secrets and smash a few dinner plates. Tears are shed, lessons learned, award nominations eagerly solicited.In addition to the pills and booze already noted, the menu at this particular feast of dysfunction includes adultery, divorce and incest. But the story of the Weston family — Beverly and Violet’s three daughters and their various menfolk, as well as Violet’s sister and brother-in-law — is secondary to the spectacle the actors make of themselves. Really, “acting” is an inadequate word for what the cast of this movie is doing. Maybe, in honor of one of the leading industries in the Sooner State, we should call it “fracting.” The application of enormous pressure is involved, a great quantity of subterranean gas is forced to the surface, and the environmental consequences are likely to be controversial.Another way to think of “August: Osage County,” which was directed by John Wells and adapted by AdvertisementIt goes without saying that nobody can beat Ms. Streep at this game. Remember Amy Adams in But everyone joins in. Ewan McGregor, as Barbara’s half-estranged husband, affects a pained smile. Abigail Breslin, as their teenage daughter, Jean, pouts and seethes. Juliette Lewis and Dermot Mulroney, as Barbara’s sister Karen and her sleazy new fiancé, stop in from another, much more entertaining, movie, one full of sex and danger and naughtiness. As the last sister, Ivy, Julianne Nicholson looks miserable. Benedict Cumberbatch, as a delicate cousin known as Little Charles, blinks his eyes and struggles with his accent. Some of them also break plates. The only people who look at all at ease — and who are genuinely pleasant to watch — are Margo Martindale and Chris Cooper, as Little Charles’s parents, Mattie Fae and Charles.“August: Osage County” falls into an uncanny valley between melodrama and camp, failing to achieve either heights of operatic feeling or flights of knowing parody. The jokes are too labored, too serious. The serious moments tilt toward the preposterous, above all a climactic revelation that seems, on sober examination, to be more of a technical detail than a seismic explosion.AdvertisementI never saw Mr. Letts’s play onstage, so I will defer to the judgment of the 2008 What the movie does have is Johnna (Misty Upham), the Native American woman who is the target of Beverly’s opening monologue and who serves as cook, nurse, maid and silent judge for the rest of the film. If Johnna does take action at one point, interrupting an incident of especially egregious misbehavior by attacking the perpetrator with a shovel. She pulls back before any harm is done, which represents, for this movie, both an uncharacteristic moment of restraint and a missed opportunity. She could have kept going and turned this thing into a blood bath. No jury in the land would convict her.“August: Osage County” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). The movie stars and the swearing are how you know it wasn’t made for TV.





A version of this review appears in print on December 27, 2013, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;