Hannibal Rising
6.2
AdvertisementBy JEANNETTE CATSOULISGiven the recent spate of horror-movie prequels, we can at least be grateful that the makers of But this is America, where all pathologies must be excavated and neutralized, so we’re off to 1944 Lithuania, where the Lecter family is facing down Nazis, Russians, Vichy French and wild boars. The arrival — and subsequent dinner plans — of a gang of starving thugs swiftly disposes of young Hannibal’s little sister and awakens his cannibalistic cravings. Eight years in a Soviet orphanage do little to rehabilitate. “You do not honor the human pecking order,” the warden tells Hannibal (Gaspard Ulliel). “You’re always hurting the bullies.” Clearly he’s more disturbed than we think.Scarcely pausing to wonder which wine goes best with East European thug, Hannibal sets out to avenge his sister and devise recipes. His mission entails a detour in a Parisian medical school to hone his slicing technique, as well as a sojourn with a Japanese aunt (Gong Li) who’s unperturbed when he beheads a butcher who has insulted her honor.“You smell of smoke and blood,” she tells her nephew fondly, struggling with dialogue that would make Jessica Simpson demand a rewrite. Silly, slack and unforgivably tedious, Thomas Harris’s screenplay is padded with interminable flashbacks and a bombastic score that telegraphs every emotion Hannibal represses. And there are a lot of them.Evidencing too much respect and too little energy, Peter Webber directs this operatic mess with none of the subtlety and wit he brought to Almost everyone involved seems deadened by the literalness of the material, especially Mr. Ulliel, whose lanky, effete avenger may snack on the cheeks of his victims but never hardens into a genuine horror. He’s like Anthony Hopkins’s brain-damaged sibling.Conceived in the clamor of the marketplace, “Hannibal Rising,” like its predecessor Advertisement“Oil of cloves,” the French detective announces, sniffing one of Hannibal’s victims. Even in the age of “C.S.I.” there are some clues only a Frenchman can be trusted to decipher.“Hannibal Rising” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has human kebabs seasoned with a smidgen of intra-familial lust.HANNIBAL RISINGOpens today nationwide. Directed by Peter Webber; written by Thomas Harris; director of photography, Ben Davis; edited by Pietro Scalia and Valerio Bonelli; music by Ilan Eschkeri and Shigeru Umebayashi; production designer, Allan Starski; produced by Dino de Laurentiis, Martha de Laurentiis and Tarak Ben Ammar; released by Metro Goldwyn Mayer and the Weinstein Company. Running time: 121 minutes.WITH: Gaspard Ulliel (Hannibal), Gong Li (Lady Murasaki), Rhys Ifans (Grutas), Kevin McKidd (Kolnas), Dominic West (Inspector Popil) and Richard Brake (Dortlich).





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page E10 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;