Lawless
7.3
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTJohn HillcoatAt the center of the cacophony are the three Bondurant brothers, forebears of the author of “The Wettest County” and upholders of a stubborn mountain code of independence and honor. Forrest, the taciturn would-be patriarch, is played by Tom Hardy, who was born in London. Howard, his drunk and volatile enforcer, is played by the Australian actor Jason Clarke. The twitchy, weak-willed runt of the litter, Jack, is our own Each actor takes a different approach to the demands of a tricky regional accent, which stretches the already thin credibility of the idea that they might be kin. Mr. Clarke does a bit of howling but not much chatting. Mr. LaBeouf, as is his custom, runs his mouth in as many directions as possible, while Mr. Hardy mostly grunts, growls and ribbits, occasionally interrupting his angry bullfrog impersonation to deliver down-home bromides that make him sound like Not that the movie, a carnival of mayhem and period detail — visually suggesting Walker Evans, Life in Franklin County is brutal and complicated, especially when a Chicago lawman named Rakes (To soften the mood a bit, there are inklings of romance (and flashes of bared skin) between Forrest and Maggie (AdvertisementJack, meanwhile, courts Bertha (Mia Wasikowska), the daughter of a local preacher. As he and his brothers expand their business — with the help of their frail young neighbor, Cricket (Dane DeHaan) — Jack develops a taste for flashy clothes and cars, affecting Cagneyesque mannerisms, even though he is not nearly as tough as Forrest or Howard.And “Lawless” seems unsure of just how tough it wants to be, bouncing between rollicking backwoods humor and graphic violence, with a dollop of good-old-boys sentimentality thrown in for good measure. It has neither the stripped-down intensity of There are too many action-movie clichés without enough dramatic purpose, and interesting themes and anecdotes are scattered around without being fully explored. This is weak and cloudy moonshine: it doesn’t burn or intoxicate.“Lawless” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Swearin’, killin’, gittin’ nekkid.





A version of this review appears in print on August 29, 2012, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;