The Beaches of Agnes
8.0
The French director Agnès Varda, a major figure in the New Wave film movement in the 1950s, in her autobiographical film, “The Beaches of Agnès.” 
                            In her wonderful 2000 movie, Profile Article: Agnès Varda
                            In her latest, the similarly glorious and generous &ldquo;The Beaches of Agn&egrave;s,&rdquo; Ms. Varda has created something of a sequel to &ldquo;The Gleaners and I.&rdquo; Much like that earlier work, it is at once an illustration of the fine art of foraging and an autobiographical portrait, narrated by its self-described &ldquo;little old lady, pleasantly plump.&rdquo; (She&rsquo;s now 81.) As before, Ms. Varda is picking through the world, close to home and far afield, finding images that please her and give her pause, like her wrinkled hand, the one not holding the camera, that she scrutinizes with rue if no obvious regret. But here the emphasis is on her own life and the images and memories that, with time, have blurred together.        
                            The images are as delightful, unexpected and playfully uninhibited as Ms. Varda, perhaps the only filmmaker who has both won the Golden Lion at the Venice Film Festival and strolled around an art exhibition while costumed as a potato (not at the same time). Born in 1928, she started as a photographer, directing her first feature, &ldquo;La Pointe-Courte,&rdquo; in 1954 when most of the French New Wave directors were still dreaming of cinema rather than making it. Often singled out as the movement&rsquo;s only woman, she cast Jean-Luc Godard as a silent clown in her second feature, &ldquo;Cl&eacute;o From 5 to 7,&rdquo; but is mainly associated with the Left Bank group and her friends and occasional colleagues Chris Marker and Alain Resnais.        
                            Though she flashes a tantalizingly rare photograph of Mr. Marker onscreen, half-on or half-off a motorcycle and wearing goggles, she also makes great, often hilarious use of her camera-shy friend&rsquo;s eccentricities. Autobiographies can be limned by the company you have kept, which in Ms. Varda&rsquo;s case includes a rather remarkable and divergent group, from Mr. Marker to Harrison Ford and the gauzy eroticist Zalman King. Mr. Ford, standing in a wintry landscape, and Mr. King, sitting in a summery one, make brief, affectionate appearances. Mr. Marker, by contrast, rather more memorably, appears in the guise of his talisman, an orange tabby named Guillaume-en-Egypte, represented here by a cartoon cat with an electronically obscured voice who rolls his eyes at the puckish Ms. Varda.        
                            Humor seems to buoy her. Her jokes and moments of visual burlesque might prove startling to those who only or best remember her for 
                            His name still brings tears to her eyes. Seen intermittently throughout the movie in still photographs and archival footage, he comes across less like a ghostly presence and more like a constant companion. Though she doesn&rsquo;t give you access to their private affairs, eliding the brute fact that he died from complications from AIDS, she does something far more precious and seemingly perilous: she lets you into her feelings, to the pleasure she derived from his company and the pain she still feels from his death. She shares Demy unselfishly with the audience, and with the same generosity and tenderness that characterizes her fictionalized film about him, 
                            Still, I&rsquo;m glad that Ms. Varda reserves most of the room in this movie for her own story. It&rsquo;s a remarkable history, rich in comedy and occasionally heartbreaking, filled with wise reflections and strange digressions about the wonders of life. It&rsquo;s a life she has come close to perfecting, I think, mostly by keeping her mind as blissfully and enduringly open as her round eyes.        
                            At one point, she says she thinks of all men who look at the sea as Ulysses (she&rsquo;s an aquatic soul), but she&rsquo;s every bit the wanderer. Whether she&rsquo;s roving a beach with a camera or rummaging through flea markets, she seeks and finds, gleaning &mdash; the word means to collect and examine &mdash; what this world of wonders has in store.        


                            Produced, written and directed by Agn&egrave;s Varda; directors of photography, Alain Sakot, H&eacute;l&egrave;ne Louvart, Julia Fabry, Jean-Baptiste Morin and Ms. Varda; edited by Ms. Varda, Mr. Morin and Baptiste Filloux; music by Joanna Bruzdowicz, St&eacute;phane Vilar and Paule Cornet; released by Cinema Guild. At Film Forum, 209 West Houston Street, west of Avenue of the Americas, South Village. In French, with English subtitles. Running time: 1 hour 49 minutes. This film is not rated.        Our legacy from the war in Iraq will be written in the lives of the people we have left behind.What did an imprisoned Times columnist have to do with a postwar best seller?Vladimir V. Putin&rsquo;s return to the Kremlin in 2012 diminishes the possibility that Russia will evolve into a stable democracy.