27 Dresses
6.1
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTAt the beginning of The problem is that much the same could be said about modern American romantic comedies. There is a touch of idiosyncrasy here and there — in this one the heroine’s dad is a widower who owns a hardware store! — but most of the elements might as well have been pulled off the registry list at a high-end chain store.The template is something like this: A career woman who lives in a bright and perky city (though usually not the one in which it was filmed; most of this  Manhattan is actually Providence, R.I.) takes a bit under two hours to make it to the altar with (or at least be stopped at the airport by) the Right Guy, who had seemed at first to be the Wrong Guy. Earlier, the Wrong Guy had seemed to be the Right Guy.For ease of reference let’s call the one the heroine ends up with the Right Wrong Guy and the one she rejects the Wrong Right Guy. In the case of “27 Dresses” the Right Wrong Guy is James Marsden, who recently played the Wrong Right Guy in The best thing about “27 Dresses,” which was written by Aline Brosh McKenna (whose script adaptation of AdvertisementToo bad it’s such a dim spark. Ms. Heigl, the blossoming babymama in Which may make the movie sound more interesting than it is. To allay that impression, let me just note that the big comic-romantic set piece comes when Jane and the Right Wrong Guy get drunk at a suburban roadhouse and sing “Benny and the Jets” while dancing on the bar. At least it wasn’t “Y.M.C.A.” or “I Got You (I Feel Good),” but still.Back at the office Jane has the requisite slutty/flaky best friend, who at least is played by the irrepressible Judy Greer (“13 Going on 30”). Jane’s sister, Tess — her rival, as it happens, for the love of the Wrong Right Guy — is Malin Akerman, who was the only remotely funny thing about Why Ms. Fletcher and Ms. McKenna couldn’t have supplied these three funny, charming women with a funny, charming movie is something of a puzzle. Or maybe it isn’t, since their task seems to have been to produce a movie that wouldn’t make all the other movies exactly like it too envious.Ms. Heigl certainly works hard to convince the audience of the existence of a universe in which she could be the dowdier, shyer member of a pair of sisters. The costume designer, Catherine Marie Thomas, worked at least as hard to find a dress (out of the 27 in the title) that might make Ms. Heigl look less than gorgeous. A futile effort, like most of the rest of the movie, or the attempt to find anything else to say about it.“27 Dresses” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has some sexual situations and some mild swearing. 27 DRESSESOpens on Friday  nationwide. Directed by Anne Fletcher; written by Aline Brosh McKenna; director of photography, Peter James; edited by Priscilla Nedd-Friendly; music by Randy Edelman; produced by Roger Birnbaum, Gary Barber and Jonathan Glickman; released by 20th Century Fox. Running time: 1 hour 47 minutes.WITH: Katherine Heigl (Jane), James Marsden (Kevin), Malin Akerman (Tess), Judy Greer (Casey) and Edward Burns (George).





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page E10 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;