He's Just Not That Into You
6.4
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe good Dr. Freud once asked, what do women want? To judge by the recent crop of what are often sneeringly referred to as chick flicks, today’s woman wants designer threads, extravagant weddings and a generous helping of public humiliation served up with  laughs, most at her expense. Where have you gone, Thelma and Louise? Oh, right: those gun-toting runaway heroines played by Geena Davis and Susan Sarandon, who wore old blue jeans and confidently put the moves on the men in their lives in Ridley Scott’s 1991  outlaw female fantasy, drove off the cliff at their big finish. You have been missed, ladies.I bring up Mr. Scott’s film because whenever faced with another puerile movie ostensibly about women, I play a little game called What Would Thelma and Louise Do? Consider, for instance, the scene from What would Thelma  have done? Well, she might have bedded Conor with gusto (and no marriage plans), as she does a hitchhiker with miles of muscle played by the young Brad Pitt. (Her greatest lament: he rips her off.) And Louise? Given that her lover is played by the gruff and grown-up Michael Madsen, I like to think she wouldn’t even have bothered with Conor. (That, or shot him.) Adult women like Louise might pull a Mrs. Robinson on special occasions, though not if there’s a man like Mr. Madsen steaming up the room. But adults have become something of an endangered species in big studio movies, particularly in romantic comedies, where female desire now largely seems reserved for shoes, wedding bells and babies.These days Hollywood is taking its storybook cues from that old children’s ditty:Mary and Johnny sitting in a treeK-I-S-S-I-N-GFirst comes love, then comes marriageThen comes Mary with a baby carriageAdvertisementSuch is more or less the reductive case in “He’s Just Not That Into You,” which is based on an obnoxious so-called advice book by Greg Behrendt and Liz Tuccillo, which in turn took its inspiration from the HBO series AdvertisementThe movie “He’s Just Not That Into You,” directed by Ken Kwapis and written by Abby Kohn and Marc Silverstein, takes this bit from a 30-minute show and turns it into an overextended 2  hours and 12 minutes. Mostly it does this by turning Gigi simultaneously into a joke (by playing her desperation for laughs) and a victim (by playing her desperation for tears). It’s a grotesque representation of female desire, one that the appealing Ms. Goodwin can’t save from caricature. It says something about the romantic comedies coming out of Hollywood that the character Ms. Goodwin plays on the HBO series Despite this, there are a few nice moments, most courtesy of Ms. Johansson’s Anna is, of course, the designated bad girl — she’s also the woman Conor dials after his date with Gigi — but the role doesn’t stick. Ms. Johansson seems too comfortable in her own beautiful skin to pay attention to wagging fingers, particularly when they belong to a twerp like Conor, who delivers a late sermon about her commitment issues. One problem with the movie is that, aside from Ben Affleck, who plays It’s worth noting that in a movie ostensibly dedicated to the relationship worries of the modern (straight) woman, Anna is also the only one in the distaff batch with an active, seemingly pleasurable sex life. Most of the other women are too busy trying to land men, trying to hold on to men or ruining their relationships with men to actually have sex. (Drew Barrymore, meanwhile, pops up a few times, often surrounded by wisecracking gay men.) Imagine an action flick in which the hero spends the entire movie chasing the villain without the compensatory satisfaction of smashing his enemy to smithereens. There’s a reason action producers like Jerry Bruckheimer blow stuff up in their movies: They know what men want.“He’s Just Not That Into You” is rated PG-13 (Women strongly cautioned). 





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page C10 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;