Non-Stop
7.0
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISA satisfying, primitive bluntness distinguishes When Mr. Neeson stirs an early morning drink with a toothbrush at the start of “Non-Stop,” the image suggests Denzel Washington’s boozing pilot in “Flight.” (Movies about really bad plane trips constitute a near subgenre, from the absurdist comedy of Soon enough, Bill is on the move, strolling through an airport, profiling potential problems and settling into one of the fancier classes. By the time the seatbelt signs have flashed, Mr. Collet-Serra has efficiently introduced a handful of familiar faces — and prospective heroes and villains — including Julianne Moore, Corey Stoll, Michelle Dockery, The Times critic Manohla Dargis reviews "Non-Stop."Here, the casting, intentionally or not, has a touch of wit because Ms. Dockery (the iron Lady Mary on “Downton Abbey”) is working the aisles as an attendant, alongside Ms. Nyong’o (known as the enslaved Patsey in Bill isn’t a predictable hero, at least initially, but a palpably human and unreliable one who shakes from fear during takeoff and then locks himself in a bathroom, duct tapes the air vent and has a smoke. He also eyeballs alcohol like a man dying of thirst, betraying a struggle for self-control and suggesting a world of pain with a single sidelong look.AdvertisementHe’s unsettlingly unsettled for a guy with a gun, which adds to the sense of disquiet once he starts receiving text messages from someone threatening to kill passengers unless $150 million is deposited in an account. Bill begins strategizing, but while he seems capable enough, he’s an excitable, volcanic wreck, which makes the state of his mental health into something of a parallel, secondary mystery.Written by John W. Richardson, Chris Roach and Ryan Engle, “Non-Stop” works best before its secrets are spilled. Mr. Collet-Serra, who directed Mr. Neeson in ““Non-Stop” doesn’t make any sense, but that’s expected, uninteresting and incidental to the pleasures of a slow-season Liam Neeson release as diverting as this one. A lot has been written about Mr. Neeson’s surprising resurrection as an older action hero, which has sometimes been more rewarding theoretically than cinematically.Mr. Collet-Serra, however, makes good on that promise with a sure genre hand and real feeling for what Mr. Neeson brings to the screen at this stage of his career, including beauty etched by time and a still-imposing body that moves with the heaviness and grandeur of an old warrior raising his sword one last time. When Mr. Neeson runs through the aisles, he can sometimes seem too big for this vehicle, even if he turns out to be exactly right.“Non-Stop” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Moviegoers with a fear of flying are also cautioned.





A version of this review appears in print on February 28, 2014, on Page C13 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;