Lee Daniels' The Butler
7.2
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTThe director Lee Daniels narrates a scene from his drama featuring Forest Whitaker and Oprah Winfrey.Nobody who has seen Taking inspiration from an The history of racism in America, and of efforts to overcome it, is usually addressed by Hollywood with a solemn, anxious, churchly hush and flattened into a tableau of villains and saints. Mr. Daniels and the screenwriter, Danny Strong, understand that both the horror and the heroism are connected with everything else that makes America such a complicated, interesting, appalling and glorious place: our politics, our popular culture, our deepest desires and our simplest habits. Making the topic safe and boring is no good for anyone.The history of repression, protest and reform did not just happen on the abstract plane of activism and politics, but also in the lives of ordinary families, who were always doing more than just suffering and struggling. The genius of “The Butler” lies in the sly and self-assured way it connects public affairs to private experience. Early on, Cecil Gaines, the character loosely based on Mr. Allen, is taught that he, like every other African-American who wants to survive in a white-dominated world, must have two faces. This practical advice is an echo of W. E. B. Du Bois’s idea, articulated in “The Souls of Black Folk,” of the “double consciousness” at the heart of the black experience in America. “We wear the mask that grins and lies” is how the poet A. O. Scott’s review of “Lee Daniels’ The Butler.”As a child, Cecil, living on a Georgia cotton farm, is exposed to the most brutal manifestations of Jim Crow, in scenes whose blunt shock lingers over the film’s gentler, funnier moments. The sight of lynched bodies swinging in front of an American flag and the terrible fates of Cecil’s parents (David Banner and Mariah Carey) imprint themselves on him and on the audience. AdvertisementThese employers are all the American presidents from Eisenhower to Reagan. Mr. Allen began his White House service under Truman, but altering the chronology allows Mr. Daniels and Mr. Strong to match Cecil’s career with the rise of the civil rights movement. Just as Cecil takes up his new job, Dwight D. Eisenhower (yes, that really is Robin Williams) is debating whether to send federal troops to Little Rock, Ark., to desegregate the public schools. Ike’s successors, played with sketch-comedy verve by other familiar performers, will find themselves in similar predicaments, as sit-ins, freedom rides and voter registration drives in the South are met with tear gas, attack dogs and firebombs.AdvertisementBut it is important to emphasize that “The Butler,” unlike almost every other movie about race in America, is not primarily about the moral awakening of white people. Nor does it neatly divide whites into snarling bigots and paragons of tolerance. There are certainly instances of raw prejudice and of sincere decency, but the presidents are complex and contradictory creatures. Lyndon B. Johnson (Liev Schreiber) spews racial slurs even as he prepares to sign the most sweeping civil rights legislation since Lincoln. Ronald Reagan (Alan Rickman) treats the black White House staff more fairly than any of his predecessors — his wife, Nancy (yes, that is Cecil, whose job involves a lot of performance, is a fiercely disciplined actor, and the same can be said of Mr. Whitaker, who demonstrates how gracefully his character walks the line between dignity and servility. But Cecil’s working life as an invisible man in the highest precincts of power is only one layer of this film. It is also interested in showing his other face. And so the camera follows him into the kitchens and back rooms of the White House and revels in his easy, irreverent camaraderie with Carter Wilson (Cuba Gooding Jr.) and James Holloway (Lenny Kravitz), fellow butlers who become his close friends.The three of them are part of Washington’s black lower-middle class, a milieu that Mr. Daniels depicts with a warm specificity that recalls the short fiction of The raucous, funny classroom scenes in “Precious” balanced that movie’s operatic flights of social dysfunction, and the evenings at the Gaineses’ place — often attended by friends played by Terrence Howard and Adriane Lenox, speaking of fine character actors — serve a similar function here. History is recorded in the workings of power and the challenge of social movements, but it is lived by people who spend their spare time telling jokes, making love, getting drunk and wearing clothes that future generations will regard with envy and embarrassment. To rush through such moments would be to rob the movie of meaning as well as pleasure, so Mr. Daniels slows down and lets the characters breathe.At other times, he sends them spinning breathlessly through the turmoil of the times. The movie’s dramatic engine is the difficult relationship between Cecil and Louis, his older son, who comes to resent his father’s cautious accommodation to the status quo. Louis, who attends Fisk University, becomes a kind of Zelig of ’60s racial politics. Often in the company of his classmate and sometime girlfriend, Carol (Yaya Alafia), he sits at a segregated Woolworth’s lunch counter, on a bus full of Freedom Riders, in the Lorraine Motel on the day of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s assassination and in a Black Panther strategy session in Oakland. Louis’s presence in all those places (and a few more besides) is meant to be symbolic rather than literal — “The Butler” is in every way more of a fable than a biopic — but the anxiety and anger that his actions provoke in Cecil are entirely believable.In part, their story is a chronicle of the generational misunderstanding that has occurred in upwardly mobile families of every background, especially in the baby boom era, when educated and restless young people turned against the parents who had sacrificed so much on their behalf. The Italian-American family in David Chase’s “Not Fade Away” is in similar crisis. But Cecil’s job and the rapid changes in the South and elsewhere add an acute and painful political dimension to their antagonism.“The Butler” has the historical insight and the generosity of spirit to honor the father and the son equally, and to look with skepticism at each’s point of view. Louis can be courageous and principled, but when his radicalism turns foolish, the film does not hesitate to take his father’s side. Cecil, on the other hand, is blind to the intensity of his son’s convictions and the necessity of the work his son is doing, and his proud patriarchal stubbornness hurts everyone in the family.But Cecil and Louis, in the end, are doing the same work: they are insisting that their country, at long last, recognize them as full citizens and human beings. Mr. Daniels measures how much of this work has been accomplished, at what cost and with what enemies and allies, and never lets us suppose that it is finished. He dedicates “The Butler” to “the heroes of the civil rights movement” and leaves no doubt that people like the title character — including the unsung maids, Pullman porters, janitors and kitchen workers who toiled far from the White House — belong in that category. We remember those who “Lee Daniels’ The Butler” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Strong language, including racial slurs, and some violent scenes.





A version of this review appears in print on August 16, 2013, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;