The Internship
6.3
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe Times critic Manohla Dargis reviews "The Internship."When did It may also be that Mr. Vaughn’s interest in libertarianism (he spoke in The Way of Google begins with Billy (Mr. Vaughn) and Nick (Mr. Wilson), traveling salesmen of pricey watches, learning that the company they work for has closed. They’re not just understandably thrown by this turn, being old-fashioned analog guys in a newfangled digital world, but they also quickly register as totally helpless, with Nick forced into labor at a bricks-and-mortar store. They’re so out of touch that when Billy decides they should become interns at Google, they have to video chat with their interviewers from a library. Adding indignity to inconvenience, Mr. Levy puts Billy and Nick in the children’s section for this scene, folding their big bodies into little chairs that illustrate just how vulnerable — childish, really — they are. Google to the rescue!In the production notes for the movie Mr. Levy compares, seemingly straight-faced, Google’s corporate headquarters to the Emerald City. There may not be a horse of a different color prancing through the company’s airy terrariumlike spaces in Mountain View, Calif. (recreated in Atlanta), with its vaulted ceilings and miles of glass walls. But the multicultural and multiethnic interns, a millennial melting pot of geeks and freaks bustling through the hallways, are just as pretty and hardworking as that Land of Oz horse. Like Billy and Nick, these shiny, smiling aspirants have convened for a chance to work full time for the tech giant, which, as the narrative progresses and the message sharpens to a blunt point, increasingly comes across as a new form of religion — Google as God or maybe Disney.Written by Mr. Vaughn and Jared Stern, “The Internship” spreads the corporate gospel with sporadic jokes, the usual buddy-film shenanigans (a visit to a strip club, a teasingly shared bed) and a lot of motivational cant. Thrown together with three other interns (Dylan O’Brien, Tobit Raphael, Tiya Sircar) and a twitchy Google employee (Josh Brener), Billy and Nick initially assume roles as kooky, kindly Uncle The name Google, surprise, appears in almost every scene in every conceivable cutesy, slangy permutation (noun, verb, adjective) in what sounds like every other line of dialogue. That the studio releasing this feature-length ad, 20th Century Fox, would lend its brand to another branded behemoth like this is vulgar if not shocking, especially given how numbers-driven studios have become. The systems that they increasingly employ to try and build hits may be not as famous or secret as Google’s algorithm, but there are, um, links. Or in the words of one industry adviser: “As audiences are more interactive than ever in their entertainment consumption, it’s become increasingly easier for marketers and the information technology community to gather data on their preferences.” Someone really Advertisement“The Internship” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Expletives and recreational excesses.





A version of this review appears in print on June 7, 2013, on Page C9 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;