Confessions of a Shopaholic
5.9
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISLike the flailing American economy, Though it tries mightily to live up to its cute title and premise with soft laughs and sticky predicaments, “Confessions of a Shopaholic” largely registers as a classic story of female self-improvement. Though the final destination on this particular road to self-actualization  hasn’t much changed since the 18th century, when Mary Shelley’s mother, Mary Wollstonecraft, raised an early feminist flag (women “must marry advantageously, and to this object their time is sacrificed, and their persons often legally prostituted”), “Confessions of a Shopaholic” paves the way with rather less contempt for its female characters than most recent so-called chick flicks. If nothing else, the director P. J. Hogan actually seems to like Rebecca, which is understandable, given that she’s played by the professionally adorable Ms. Fisher.A gifted physical comedian whose top-heavy frame always seems to be listing forward, as if she were anxious to get to the next scene, Ms. Fisher plays Rebecca as a lovable dingbat who’s not remotely as silly as her towering heels suggest. A fool for fashion, though not for men, Rebecca works as a journalist, which might seem like another laughable Hollywood fantasy if her magazine didn’t fold soon after the story begins. Left without a steady paycheck and with terrifying credit card bills, she lands a position at a financial magazine run by the swoony Luke Brandon (Hugh Dancy), who inexplicably gives her a dollars-and-sense column that becomes a hit with readers who clearly should have looked elsewhere for advice.Everything you think might happen does, for the most part painlessly. Rebecca learns and laughs, kisses and cries ,while wearing candy-colored, sometimes unfortunately coordinated outfits. The appealing supporting  cast includes John Goodman and Joan Cusack as her parents, and, as her best friend, Krysten Ritter, whose pillowy lips and crack timing suggest that she might be moving into lead roles sometime soon.AdvertisementIf the producers are smart, they should make sure to tap both Ms. Fisher and Ms. Ritter for the inevitable sequel, which, while certainly improbable and probably inadvisable, might inspire one of those Depression-era follies in which all a girl needed was a catchy song and gold-digger dreams.“Confessions of a Shopaholic” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). A little kissing and a lot of shopping.CONFESSIONS OF A SHOPAHOLICOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by P. J. Hogan; written by Tracey Jackson, Tim Firth and Kayla Alpert, based on the books WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page C14 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;