Sucker Punch
6.1
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTYou could go to see “Zack SnyderAll of these might actually be the same place, as filtered through the mind of a young woman with enormous eyes and pouty lips who goes by the name Babydoll (The hospital becomes a brothel, its imperious Polish chief psychologist (AdvertisementThe men who watch her performance back at the bawdy house also fall into a state of paralytic rapture. Viewers of the movie, denied (or perhaps spared) the sight of Ms. Browning’s gyrations, would be more apt to nod off if not for the incessant noise.AdvertisementThese interminable sequences of overscale mayhem are kinetic and elaborate but almost entirely lacking in tension, grace or visual wit. Babydoll and company leap around like video-game avatars, following the instructions of a crinkly faced guru played by Scott Glenn. The fantasy-action-dance scenes at least offer some respite from the pervasive ugliness of “Sucker Punch,” not only for Babydoll, but for the rest of us as well. Soon after her arrival she is befriended by Rocket (Jena Malone), whose sister, Sweet Pea (It is not just that the women are attired in garish boudoir fashions, cropped schoolgirl uniforms and the latest action lingerie. With a touch of humor — with any at all — “Sucker Punch,” which Mr. Snyder wrote with Steve Shibuya, might have acknowledged the campy, kinky aspects of its premise. But even as it exploits, within the hypocritical constraints of the PG-13 rating, salacious images of exposed flesh and threatened innocence, the film also self-righteously traffics in moral outrage.Every fan of the old Hollywood westerns knows that certain crimes — sexual violence against women, the killing of children — justify extreme acts of brutal vengeance. Mr. Snyder, in the manner of some slasher auteurs of the 1970s, reverses the equation. You watch as women are terrorized and preyed upon, pre-emptively excused from the nastier implications of voyeurism by the knowledge that comeuppance is on the horizon. And since that’s the case, why not sit back and enjoy the show?But there is nothing here to enjoy, beyond the tiny satisfaction in noting that the movie lives up to its name. “Sucker Punch” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Leering, eroticized violence against women followed by bloody revenge, but no nudity, sex or serious swearing.Sucker PunchOpens on Friday nationwide.Directed by Zack Snyder; written by Mr. Snyder and Steve Shibuya, based on a story by Mr. Snyder; director of photography, Larry Fong; visual effects by John DesJardin; edited by William Hoy; music by Tyler Bates and Marius DeVries; production design by Rick Carter; costumes by Michael Wilkinson; produced by Mr. Snyder and Deborah Snyder; released by Warner Brothers Pictures. Running time:two hours.WITH: Emily Browning (Babydoll), Abbie Cornish (Sweet Pea), Jena Malone (Rocket), Vanessa Hudgens (Blondie), Jamie Chung (Amber), Carla Gugino (Dr.Vera Gorski), Oscar Isaac (Blue Jones), Jon Hamm (High Roller/Doctor) and Scott Glenn (Wise Man).





Today’s Film Reviews: BAL (HONEY), a Turkish-language
film directed by Semih
Kaplanoglu. 9
DIARY OF A WIMPY KID: RODRICK
RULES, directed by David Bowers.
9
DRAWING WITH CHALK, directed
by Todd Giglio. 9
ILLEGAL, a French- and Russian-
language film directed by
Olivier Masset-Depasse. 11
I TRAVEL BECAUSE I HAVE TO, I
COME BACK BECAUSE I LOVE YOU,
a Portuguese-language film directed
by Marcelo Gomes and
Karim Aïnouz. 9
KORKORO, a French- and Romani-
language film directed
by Tony Gatlif. 9
MIA AND THE MIGOO, an animated
film directed by Jacques-
Rémy Girerd. 12
MIRAL, directed by Julian
Schnabel. 14
MISTS, a Portuguese-language
documentary directed by Ricardo
Costa. 9
ONE HUNDRED MORNINGS, directed
by Conor Horgan. 9
PEEP WORLD, directed by Barry
W. Blaustein. 10
POTICHE (TROPHY WIFE), a
French-language film directed
by François Ozon. 13
SUCKER PUNCH, directed by
Zack Snyder. 8
WHITE IRISH DRINKERS, directed
by John Gray. 9A version of this review appears in print on March 25, 2011, on Page C8 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;