Dead Poets Society
8.0
LEAD: The time is 1959 and the place is the Welton Academy in Vermont. Welton is one of those expensive, tradition-bound boys' preparatory schools somewhat more beloved in, and more significant to, English literature than American.
The time is 1959 and the place is the Welton Academy in Vermont. Welton is one of those expensive, tradition-bound boys' preparatory schools somewhat more beloved in, and more significant to, English literature than American.

This being 1959, Welton has not yet been pressured into accepting young women or blacks. Its world is insular, that of the privileged white male who, if he is not already a scion of Old Money, will probably marry it. Into this rarefied atmosphere comes John Keating (Robin Williams), himself a Welton alumnus, who returns to teach English and to shake up the old school with his enthusiasm for poetry and his unconventional teaching methods.

One of the major problems with ''Dead Poets Society,'' Peter Weir's dim, sad new movie, is that although John Keating is the most vivid, most complex character in it, he is not around long enough. He is really no more than the catalyst who brings about events over which he has no control.

''Dead Poets Society,'' which opens today at Cinema 1 and other theaters, is far less about Keating than about a handful of impressionable boys who become bewitched by Keating's exuberant assaults on the order of academe.

They include Neil Perry (Robert Sean Leonard), a hard-working honors student who dreams of becoming an actor though his father insists that he go to Harvard to study medicine. Todd Anderson (Ethan Hawke) is so shy that he is frozen with fear when required to speak in front of the other students. Charlie Dalton (Gale Hansen) has the makings of a true rebel and poet.

At Keating's first class of the new semester, he orders his students to tear out the preface in their poetry anthology. The offending pages suggest that the value of poetry can be measured in much the same way as the area of a rectangle.

Keating's credo: ''Carpe diem!'' (''Seize the day!''), because tomorrow we will all be food for worms. ''We don't read and write poetry because it is cute, but because it is full of the passion of life.''

He mixes great swatches of Whitman with imitations of Marlon Brando and John Wayne. He recalls that when he was a boy, ''I was the intellectual of 98-pound weaklings. I'd go to the beach and people would kick copies of Byron in my face.''

He drills his students mercilessly until each begins to perceive that, only by being out of step with others, will he have a chance to realize himself. With his encouragement, they revive a clandestine campus group of which Keating had been a founding member, the Dead Poets Society. After hours, the members meet in a nearby cave, tell ghost stories, read Tennyson aloud and, in one case, play the saxophone.

In Mr. Williams's Keating, the movie has an authentic approximation of the kind of teacher who not only instructs, but also changes his students' lives. He is not, unfortunately, the center of Tom Schulman's screenplay, which moves with such deliberate predictability that one must walk very slowly not to walk ahead of it.

One would have to have been raised in a space station not to know that Keating must come into conflict with the other masters, and that one of his students will take his teachings to some fatal length. Even worse, Mr. Schulman and Mr. Weir seem to accept the Keating character at romantic face value. In allowing him to remain a sort of hip Mr. Chips, they leave unexplored the contradictory nature of his responsibilities. In fact, the Keating character is far more culpable than either he or the movie realizes.

In this fashion, the movie undercuts Mr. Williams's exceptionally fine performance, making the character seem more of a dubious fool than is probably intended.

Mr. Weir (''Picnic at Hanging Rock,'' ''The Year of Living Dangerously'' and ''Witness,'' among others) obtains some very good performances from the younger actors, particularly from Mr. Leonard, and from Norman Lloyd, who plays the headmaster.

Yet the director cannot resist tarting up the movie with the fancified effects that pass for art: broad, eerie shots of birds taking off (or landing), night scenes prettily lighted from sources of illumination that must have been provided by the gods, along with scenes from an amateur production of ''A Midsummer Night's Dream'' in which Puck (for reasons that have more to do with the movie than the play) wears Christ's crown of thorns.

Like that crown, the movie is too heavy for its own good.

''Dead Poets Society,'' which has been rated PG (''Parental Guidance Suggested''), would probably bore and confuse very young audiences. 
Subversive Verse 
DEAD POETS SOCIETY, directed by Peter Weir; written by Tom Schulman; director of photography, John Seale; edited by William Anderson; music by Maurice Jarre; production designer, Wendy Stites; produced by Steven Haft, Paul Junger Witt and Tony Thomas; released by Touchstone Pictures. At Cinema 1, Third Avenue and 60th Street, and other theaters. Running time: 124 minutes. This film is rated PG. 
John Keating ... Robin Williams 
Neil Perry ... Robert Sean Leonard 
Todd Anderson ... Ethan Hawke 
Knox Overstreet ... Josh Charles 
Charlie Dalton ... Gale Hansen 
Mr. Nolan ... Norman Lloyd 
Richard Cameron ... Dylan Kussman 
Steven Meeks ... Allelon Ruggiero