Lethal Weapon 2
7.2
LEAD: Though it includes a smashed car full of Krugerrands, a hillside house blown off its stilts and a bomb set under a toilet, the point of ''Lethal Weapon 2'' is that Mel Gibson and Danny Glover get to race around in all that chaos, acting crazy. Before it skids out of control in the final sequence, the film is so careful to preserve its successful comic-action formula that it follows the most basic law of sequels.
Though it includes a smashed car full of Krugerrands, a hillside house blown off its stilts and a bomb set under a toilet, the point of ''Lethal Weapon 2'' is that Mel Gibson and Danny Glover get to race around in all that chaos, acting crazy. Before it skids out of control in the final sequence, the film is so careful to preserve its successful comic-action formula that it follows the most basic law of sequels. If you liked ''Lethal Weapon,'' you'll like ''Lethal Weapon 2''; it's almost as simple as that.

The 1987 film was fresher, faster and wittier than most action movies largely because of the shrewd pairing of Mr. Gibson, as a cop so personally depressed he was suicidal on the job, with Mr. Glover, as his cautious partner, a 50-ish family man who just wants to survive long enough to retire. Mr. Gibson was the comic and Mr. Glover the straight man, and these actors handled their roles with the flair of nuclear physicists showing how easy it is to do a multiplication problem. Richard Donner's direction was slick but full of such grace notes as Mr. Gibson's deep affection for the Three Stooges.

In ''Lethal Weapon 2,'' Mr. Gibson's Martin Riggs is still the zany cute one, and Mr. Glover's Roger Murtaugh still the put-upon, dignified one. Mr. Donner slides back into the formula so well that the sequel begins in the middle of a long chase scene with many crashing, exploding cars. We don't know whom the partners are chasing or why they are in Murtaugh's wife's station wagon, but we do hear Riggs urge his friend to live recklessly and break the 65 miles-per-hour barrier. It's as if the film makers said: ''Let's not pretend we need a plot. You know these guys; here's a car chase.''

When the partners discover the carload of Krugerrands, though, the plot becomes so loaded with coincidences that Los Angeles seems like the smallest town in America. The villains are South African diplomats. They are murderers, smugglers and - not the least of their ugly traits, by the film's standards - supercilious men dripping with icy contempt for Riggs and Murtaugh. That they are South Africans and Murtaugh is black simply adds another fillip to their villainy.

As it turns out, Riggs and Murtaugh are assigned to guard a meek-looking accountant named Leo, who laundered a half-billion dollars for these same South Africans and skimmed some for himself. As Leo, hyperactive and puppy-dog eager to hang around during shoot-outs, Joe Pesci does a funny turn on the ordinary role of a good-natured pest.

In fact, almost everything about ''Lethal Weapon 2'' signals that this is silly fun, from Mr. Gibson's penchant for jumping on the tops of moving cars to the jokey way the song ''Knockin' on Heaven's Door'' plays on the soundtrack in a scene when it looks as if someone has been shot too often. Despite their violence, films like ''Lethal Weapon'' and ''Die Hard'' are our equivalents of old shoot-em-up westerns, and the bodies covered in movie blood are just notches on some hero's gun.

So it comes as a disturbing jolt when ''Lethal Weapon 2'' raises the stakes at the end, as if this cartoon violence is no longer enough. Because the South African villains have diplomatic immunity, the story is neatly set up for the moment when Riggs and Murtaugh get to toss away their badges and turn into vigilantes. It is chilling to see these two comic good guys become Charles Bronson. The bloody finale of ''Lethal Weapon 2,'' which opens today at the Sutton and other theaters, is brutal. It adds a dark, distasteful twist to an otherwise bright formula. 
RACING AROUND, ACTING CRAZY - LETHAL WEAPON 2, directed by Richard Donner; written by Jeffrey Boam; story by Shane Black and Warren Murphy; director of photography, Stephen Goldblatt; film editor, Stuart Baird; music by Michael Kamen, Eric Clapton and David Sanborn; production designer, J. Michael Riva; produced by Mr. Donner and Joel Silver; released by Warner Brothers. At the Sutton, 57th Street and Third Avenue, and other theaters. Running time: 112 minutes. This film is rated R. 
Martin Riggs...Mel Gibson 
Rodger Murtaugh...Danny Glover 
Leo Getz...Joe Pesci 
Arjen Rudd...Joss Ackland 
Peter Vorstedt...Derrick O'Connor 
Rika Van Den Haas...Patsy Kensit