The Mortal Instruments: City of Bones
6.0
AdvertisementBy JEANNETTE CATSOULISAndrogynous young men with liquid eyes and creamy English accents are as essential to teenage fantasy films as alternate worlds and complicated glossaries. And if they possess supernatural powers — like the ability to wear head-to-toe pleather without sweating uncontrollably — so much the better.In Not so Clary (Based on the first book of the young-adult series by Cassandra Clare, “The Mortal Instruments” raises our hopes with early scenes of relaxed naturalism that allow the actors — most of whom deliver the goods — to work without tripping over digital effects. Ms. Headey, who has taken her protective-mom persona from the much-missed And he probably would have received it had the screenwriter, Jessica Postigo Paquette, not been obliged to shoehorn a week’s worth of exposition into two hours and change. Faced with the book’s everything-but-the-kitchen-sink approach to the supernatural — an ever-shifting feud of werewolves and warlocks, vampires and assorted demonic entities — neither she nor her director, AdvertisementSuffering most from this compression is the movie’s big bad, Valentine (Jonathan Rhys Meyers), an evil Shadowhunter searching for a magic artifact to further his wicked plans. Saddled with silly speeches and an array of little pigtails stuck to the back of his head, Mr. Rhys Meyers (more intimidating by far as Henry VIII on Excessively busy and occasionally cheesy (a tropical garden hookup between Clary and Jace, complete with plaintive pop music and an on-cue sprinkler soaking, provoked hearty guffaws from my fellow viewers), the bustling plot sacrifices clarity for density, and emotional resonance for flirty one-liners. References to At the same time, the director of photography, Geir Hartly Andreassen, strives to avoid the alienating palette of too many digitally dependent films, the sludgy browns and yellowed whites that turn human skin into parchment and actors into avatars. Washing his rich jewel tones in a softly tarnished glaze, he gives Clary’s world a warmth and texture that ground the character and invite us in. Without him, not even the possibility of a high warlock’s wardrobe malfunction could entice us into the sequel.“The Mortal Instruments: City of Bones” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). A bit of heterosexual kissing, a hint of homosexual longing and a creatively deployed frying pan.





A version of this review appears in print on August 21, 2013, on Page C5 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;