The Next Three Days
7.4
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTOne of the strictures of the old Motion Picture Production Code was that “methods of crime should not be explicitly presented” and that in particular, “theft, robbery, safe-cracking, and dynamiting of trains, mines, buildings, etc., should not be detailed in method.” The censors of Or maybe a violent, feature-length version of one of those once-hot cable television makeover shows. Here, a regular guy named John (John’s actions, which bring him into contact with all kinds of nasty characters (including drug dealers played by RZA and Kevin Corrigan) and eventually arouse the suspicions of the police (mainly Aisha Hinds, Jason Beghe and Allan Steele), are certainly not what you would expect of a college instructor played by anyone other than Mr. Crowe. Our man’s motives, however, could hardly be more noble. One fine morning, John’s wife, Lara (Three years pass quickly (in about 15 minutes of screen time), and by the time his wife’s last appeal has been denied, John, certain of her innocence, finds himself driven to an extreme and elaborate display of spousal loyalty. He takes pictures, draws maps, buys a gun and some false passports, and plans a one-man assault on the Allegheny County Jail. Their young son, Luke (Ty Simpkins), wonders what Dad is up to, but he never raises a fuss. John’s parents (Helen Carey and Brian Dennehy) accept spontaneous baby-sitting assignments without complaint.In his quiet, brooding roles (of which this is surely one), Mr. Crowe carries the possibility of violence coiled within him, and one of the problems with “The Next Three Days” is that John’s menace and desperation are visible from the start, so that the occasional displays of uncertainty and anxiety are not quite convincing. Nor, when you stop to think about it, is most of the rest of the movie, which remakes AdvertisementWhat about Lara? The structure of the film, which skips over the details of the trial and flashes back teasingly to the crime itself, allows for some ambiguity about her guilt. But Ms. Banks is never given enough time on-screen to complete the portrait that might make this uncertainty mean something. Is this woman capable of bludgeoning someone to death with a fire extinguisher? The court says yes, her husband says no, but Mr. Haggis does not let us see the shadows of her personality that would make this argument interesting.AdvertisementNor does he exploit the absurdist, almost comic themes that are latent in the film’s premise. An intellectual with a closet full of corduroy jackets and a Prius is transformed by Kafkaesque circumstances into an outlaw — there is all kinds of potential here, but Mr. Haggis lacks the Hitchcockian sense of mischief to make it blossom. His work as a director (“The Next Three Days” is rated PG-13  (Parents strongly cautioned). Guns. Drugs. Crime. Take good notes, kids.THE NEXT THREE DAYSOpens on Friday nationwide. Written and directed by WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on November 19, 2010, on Page C10 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;