A Nightmare on Elm Street
7.5
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTT“Remember me?” This is one of the half-clever, trailer-ready catchphrases (“Let’s play tag: you’re it!,” “Fooled you!” and so on) uttered by Freddy Krueger in the newly rebooted Celebrity takes its toll, though, and after the first Concocted out of a sinister blend of primal terror, childhood memory and urban legend, Freddy represented something authentically scary: the unconscious brought to literal, murderous life. That his rampages singled out mostly privileged suburban teenagers — kids whose innocence and security is a collective national obsession — made them even more frightening.To its credit, the remade “Nightmare on Elm Street,” directed by Samuel Bayer from a script by Wesley Strick and Eric Heisserer, tries to recapture some of the grisly wit of the original. Freddy is played by It has something to do with repressed memories of a trauma that befell them in preschool, but the deeper “Nightmare” delves into this sordid back story, the less haunting it becomes. Some of the early set pieces — the opening sequence in a diner, for example, or another that unfolds after one of the victims has dozed off in class — dispense their shocks inventively, but for the most part the movie traffics in overly familiar scare tactics, setting up predictable false alarms and telegraphing in advance just when Freddy will pop into the frame and utter one of his labored witticisms.AdvertisementThe filmmakers’ use of computer-generated effects doesn’t help much, and makes a few of the scenes that should be horrifying look silly. The cast — notably Rooney Mara and Kyle Gallner as Freddy’s longest-surviving prey — are reasonably adept at screaming, crying, looking sleepy and earnestly delivering expository information they glean from research on the Internet and at the local bookstore.Much of what they uncover  has to do with sleep deprivation, and “A Nightmare on Elm Street” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Bloody violence and swearing.A NIGHTMARE ON ELM STREETOpens on Friday  nationwide.Directed by Samuel Bayer; written by Wesley Strick and Eric Heisserer, based on a story by Mr. Strick and characters created by Wes Craven; director of photography, Jeff Cutter; edited by Glen Scantlebury; music by Steve Jablonsky; production designer, Patrick Lumb; costumes by Mari-An Ceo; produced by Michael Bay, Andrew Form and Brad Fuller; released by New Line Cinema and Warner Brothers Pictures. Running time: 1 hour 42 minutes.WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on April 30, 2010, on Page C9 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;