The Equalizer
7.2
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTThe Times film critic A. O. Scott reviews “The Equalizer.”Perhaps the best thing about “Bob, who works at a Home Depot-like building supply store, is a widower with meticulous habits and friendly relations with most of the people he meets. A ready source of self-help catchphrases that would sound silly coming from anyone other than Mr. Washington, he is a mentor to a younger co-worker (Johnny Skourtis). When insomnia hits, Bob repairs to a 24-hour diner, where he drinks tea, reads classic novels and makes avuncular small talk with Alina, a young prostitute whose street name is Teri (Eventually, he’s going to kill someone, of course, but before he does, A scene from Antoine Fuqua’s film “The Equalizer,” featuring Denzel Washington and Chloë Grace Moretz.And then Bob takes out a room full of Russian mobsters, and the fun — which is to say the escalating bloodshed — begins in earnest. That first batch of bad guys, gored with corkscrews, brained with paperweights and sent off into the next world with anything else that comes to hand, were guilty of hurting Alina. It turns out that they sit at the bottom of a pyramid of depravity that reaches all the way to a man named Pushkin back in Moscow. Thinking that rival gangs might be moving in on his territory, Mr. Pushkin (Vladimir Kulich) sends a lieutenant known as Teddy (Marton Csokas) to straighten things out and to provide enough evil mayhem to justify more righteous brutality on Bob’s part.Teddy’s elegantly tailored suits hide a chest full of prison tattoos, and his sneering sadism and fastidious diction mark him out for an especially painful death, though the rules of the genre dictate that we’ll have to wait for it. Once he shows up, painful death is pretty much all “The Equalizer” has on its mind. Alina, the innocent, vulnerable pretext for all the killing, pretty much disappears, though one of her colleagues (Haley Bennett) takes a turn in the victim role. Violence against women is handled discreetly, but the men stomp, stab, shoot and bludgeon one another with showy abandon and an almost erotic intensity.AdvertisementBob — it might not be his real name — is chaste, and his motives are pure, though, in his past, he might have done some of the usual vaguely alluded-to “terrible things.” His decency licenses both his extreme brutality and our enjoyment of it. We can persuade ourselves that we are watching the spectacle of enacted justice rather than the sentimentalization of a homicidal sociopath.Really, though, I’m splitting ethical hairs. Mr. Washington is, with I can’t help feeling a little bit sorry for some of the bad guys, though. Not Pushkin and Teddy and the midlevel pimp who beats up Alina. In a movie like this, due process for guys like that is properly supplied by a nail gun or a jagged piece of glass. (This may be the place to note that Bob, who never carries his own firearm, has a MacGyver — or do I mean But what about the lower-ranking muscle, the bald dudes with tattoos who have to open the doors of the black S.U.V.s and throw the first punches at a man they have no way of knowing is really an elite super-assassin? Were they warned about this in the job interview? Do they have health insurance? They’re really just working stiffs, too, and the way they’re treated seems a little unfair.“The Equalizer” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Swearing and killing.





A version of this review appears in print on September 26, 2014, on Page C12 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;