The Cabin in the Woods
7.0
Advertisement A.&#160;O. SCOTTJust before a recent advance screening of The filmmakers — Which is not to say that it entirely fails, either. Right at the beginning two parallel conceits are set in motion. Five attractive young people, full of pheromones and naïve exuberance, set off for a party weekend in a remote — well, take a guess.Meanwhile, a pair of white-shirted white guys (Richard Jenkins and AdvertisementSome of the pleasure of the first (and best) part of “The Cabin in the Woods” comes from trying to see just over the narrative horizon and figure out what these incompatible sets of clichés have to do with each other. Two distinct kinds of movie are being yoked, by violence, together, and the performers inhabit their familiar roles with unusual wit.From SXSW, Drew Goddard, the director and co-writer of “The Cabin in the Woods,” discusses his work.Since this is — at least officially and at least half the time — a slasher/zombie/monster kind of movie, the revelers are arranged according to well-known types. Or they seem to be: the discrepancies between those assigned identities and other, less predictable aspects of their personalities turn out to be part of an elaborate meta-meta-joke. The designated dumb jock (Chris Hemsworth) and the designated dumb blonde (Anna Hutchison) may not actually be all that dumb. The cynical, paranoid stoner (Fran Kranz) might turn out to be more sensible than most of his friends. Even the bland, nice, would-be couple (Kristen Connolly and Jesse Williams, both charming) whose survival you are primed to root for, are kind of, well, interesting. Now let’s sit back and watch them die!Once the doomed five reach their destination (after an ominous stop at a deserted gas station), terrible things begin to happen pretty much on schedule, and the two plots begin to converge. Mr. Whitford and Mr. Jenkins provide clues and tongue-in-cheek commentary about the ordeal at the cabin in the woods, which they are observing along with a nervous co-worker (Amy Acker) and a skeptical security guard (Brian White).AdvertisementTheir callous amusement at the unfolding spectacle of violence and terror is mildly shocking, but of course it is also a reflection of the audience’s experience. We go to scary movies because we enjoy being manipulated into being scared by phenomena we know better than to believe in, and “The Cabin in the Woods” takes special delight in the mechanics of its own artifice.Dismissing the recent vogue for technically crude, fake-real shockers in the The lesson of the “Scream” movies — a lesson their characters reliably failed to learn — was that a grasp of the semiotics of cinematic horror will not necessarily save you from a crazed killer. At its best, that series proved that it was possible to be spoofy and scary at the same time, to activate the cognitive and sensory circuits that produce both laughter and fear.“The Cabin in the Woods” bungles that relatively straightforward trick, partly because it wants to do a lot more than provide a dose of shrieks and giggles. There is a scholarly, nerdy, completist sensibility at work here that is impressive until it becomes exhausting. Not content to toss off just any horror movie, Mr. Goddard and “The Cabin in the Woods” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Skin, gore and swearing, sometimes all at once.





A version of this review appears in print on April 13, 2012, on Page C11 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;