The Man from U.N.C.L.E.
7.3
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISGuy Ritchie makes the kind of enjoyably disreputable movies that are fun to watch until they’re not. He’s a talented flimflam artist and, for the industry, I imagine, a useful one because of how he glosses up schlocky, sketchy projects (his Guy Ritchie narrates a sequence from “The Man From U.N.C.L.E.”His latest, “The Man From U.N.C.L.E.,” is, as its title trumpets, a big-screen rendering of that 1960s television series. Running from 1964 to ’68, the show centered on a pair of operatives, an American, Napoleon Solo (named by Ian Fleming, an early creative adviser, and played with unctuous suavity by Robert Vaughn), and his nimble Soviet counterpart, Illya Kuryakin (a professionally enigmatic David McCallum, working a blond Beatle fringe and contrasting turtlenecks). In a flourish of showbiz détente, the spies have been teamed to fight one of those fictional criminal outfits (T.H.R.U.S.H.) that make it seem as if real-world villainy can be handled with little more than charm and Zippo lighters that fire bullets. The television series is a goof, and a fig leaf for Cold War dread.The movie opens in 1963 but tries hard not to be a museum piece, partly with a slick, agitated style. It revs up in the vicinity of Checkpoint Charlie, somewhere in East Berlin, but stays there only long enough to crash some cars and pick up the actress Alicia Vikander. She plays Gaby, one of those amusingly all-purpose characters who, in addition to having some useful relatives — her father is a nuclear physicist, her uncle an unreconstructed Nazi — can fix a car engine, slip into a couture outfit and snap a flaccid line to life. Mostly, she is the regulation Girl and narrative bridge uniting the new Napoleon (
                The two TV espionage shows, now both on big screens, share pages from the spy-movie playbook.            Gaby also serves as the political football in the opener, which finds Napoleon coercing her to go over the wall in the name of the greater good or some such. First, though, they need to outmaneuver Illya, which they do in one of those Tom-and-Jerry chases that nicely shows off the stunt performers’ wheel skills in providentially emptied streets. Written by Mr. Ritchie and Lionel Wigram, the movie throws out a lot of plot, most of which disintegrates on impact but pragmatically leads to Napoleon, Illya and Gaby in cahoots. Locations change as fast as the actors’ outfits, and at one point Hugh Grant shows up at the races as does another attraction, the villainous Victoria (Elizabeth Debicki), who brings to mind by turns a lost Redgrave relative and Madonna, Mr. Ritchie’s ex.At times “The Man From U.N.C.L.E.” works better as a fashion show than a movie, with a wardrobe — “The Man From U.N.C.L.E.” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Bloodless mayhem.





A version of this review appears in print on August 14, 2015, on Page C3 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;