The Abandoned
5.6
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTAt the end of Described in the final credits as “a Spanish-U.K.-Bulgarian co-production” (not something you see every day), “The Abandoned” may be the first film whose title seems to refer to its American release strategy. Slinking into theaters yesterday without critics’ screenings or much advance publicity, it is less frightening than puzzling. Through the murk and gloom of its images, a mystery emerges: why didn’t this go straight to DVD?Directed by Nacho Cerdà from a script he wrote with Karim Hussain and Richard Stanley, “The Abandoned” is not completely terrible. Artily shot and artfully edited, it makes the most of its setting, a desolate island somewhere in the Russian hinterland, where the sun shines for about 20 minutes each day and where the main characters are powerless to prevent flashlights from slipping out of their hands.An American woman named Marie (Anastasia Hille) shows up on the island, searching for clues about the fate of her birth mother, and stumbles into a ghoulish family reunion. She meets her milky-eyed zombie double and a man claiming to be her twin brother, Nikolai (Karel Roden). A scene of long-ago family violence is re-enacted for their benefit as crockery rattles, lights flicker, and the cries of babies bubble up in the sound mix.After a while, Mr. Cerdà exhausts his repertory of spooky effects —  too many dark hallways and illogical, foreboding point-of-view shots — and you begin to hunger for exposition, always a bad sign in a horror film. Even worse is that, by the time the explanations arrive, you no longer care.Advertisement“The Abandoned” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has some gory violence, brief nudity and frequent swearing on the part of the lead actress, who wonders aloud how she got into this mess.THE ABANDONEDOpened yesterday nationwide. Directed by Nacho Cerdà; written by Mr. Cerdà, Karim Hussain and Richard Stanley; director of photography, Xavi Giménez; edited by Jorge Macaya; music by Alfons Conde; production designer, Balter Gallart; produced by Carlos Fernández and Julio Fernández; released by Lionsgate and After Dark Films. Running time: 95 minutes.WITH: Anastasia Hille (Marie), Karel Roden (Nikolai), Paraskeva Djukelova (Marie’s Mother), Valentin Ganev (Andrei Misharin) and Carlos Reig (Anatoliy).





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page B11 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;