The Place Beyond the Pines
7.3
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTIn this Anatomy of a Scene, the director Derek Cianfrance narrates his film’s opening sequence.“The Place Beyond the Pines,”Which it is, only bigger, longer and elevated to a place on the border between grandeur and grandiosity. Set in and around Schenectady, N.Y. (whose Mohawk name is evoked in the title), “The Place Beyond the Pines” has a lot to say about class, manhood and the curious operations of fate, themes that Mr. Cianfrance articulates with blunt conviction and, at times, impressive artistry. He goes on too long: the three-part story, spread over nearly two and a half hours, represents a triumph of sympathetic imagination and a failure of narrative economy. But if, in the end, the film can’t quite sustain its epic vision, it does, along the way, achieve the density and momentum of a good novel.If it were a book, the name on the spine might be Russell Banks or Joyce Carol Oates, since, like them, Mr. Cianfrance is drawn to blue-collar landscapes of the northeastern United States. This Schenectady, seen at two different moments 15 years apart, feels like a place that time forgot, far away from the tumult of politics or commercial popular culture. It’s a small town of beat-up houses and late-night diners whose citizens dwell under film-noir shadows of violence and corruption.Luke (AdvertisementThe second section of “The Place Beyond the Pines” is about another man, a police officer named Avery (Mr. Cianfrance’s previous movie, AdvertisementYour attention is especially rewarded by the work of Mr. Gosling and Mr. Cooper, who offer contrasting studies in tragic, shortsighted masculine intensity. Mr. Gosling’s cool self-possession — the only thing he was allowed to display in His most serious flaw may be his commitment to a romantic view of himself as an outlaw with a noble cause. Avery, the son of a judge (Harris Yulin), is threatened above all by his own righteous arrogance, which undermines his relationship with his wife (Rose Byrne) and clouds his professional prospects. Mr. Cooper, once again showing himself to be a restless and resourceful talent, plays Avery as a handsome, charming winner who is nonetheless very difficult to like.The Times critic A. O. Scott reviews "The Place Beyond the Pines."The sins of these two complicated fathers are visited on their sons, and it is in the third-act swirl of revenge and redemption that “The Place Beyond the Pines” goes wrong, trading its grit and psychological insight for overwrought, capitalized emotions. As the movie wears on, you start to notice Mr. Cianfrance’s overreliance on certain shots (like the long, behind-the-head follow) and the insistent, stabbing squall of Mike Patton’s otherwise effective score. (Speaking of music, the movie ends with a The failures of this film are the product of its aspirations, which makes it easy to forgive, even though the disappointment is hard to shake. The movie is a little like both its anguished protagonists, going wrong in the name of vanity and love.“The Place Beyond the Pines” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Crime, punishment, drugs, swearing.





A version of this review appears in print on March 29, 2013, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;