Johnny English Reborn
6.3
AdvertisementBy STEPHEN HOLDENSome may wonder why “Johnny English Reborn,” the sequel to the The short answer is that Mr. Atkinson, the brilliant British master of controlled comedy, is a global star whose two Mr. Bean movies have each grossed upward of $200 million internationally, and the original “Johnny English” a hefty $160 million.It is also worth noting that the sequel, made with a new director, The sad fact is that Mr. Atkinson’s brand of British lunacy, in which the humor breaks through a pose of stiff-upper-lip propriety, is too contained to excite the jaded American audience for gross-out pranks. Mr. Atkinson is never ferocious or lewd. At his most uninhibited he suggests Jim Carrey playing a refined Briton.AdvertisementIn its tongue-in-cheek attitude AdvertisementThe story begins at a Tibetan Buddhist monastery where Johnny, disgraced and stripped of his knighthood after a fiasco in Mozambique (the very word Johnny is suddenly called back to MI7, which in his absence has been privatized and renamed Toshiba British Intelligence (a nifty example of product placement spoofing itself?), complete with a corporate slogan, “Spying for You.” The agency’s haughty new boss, code name Pegasus (a deadpan Gillian Anderson), assigns him to Hong Kong to prevent the assassination of the Chinese premier. But before heading into the field he must undergo a high-tech facial scan from the resident behavioral psychologist (Johnny, a snob and a racist, is teamed up with Tucker (Daniel Kaluuya), a smart, black junior agent who good-humoredly endures Johnny’s outrageous condescension as they pursue three assassins known as Vortex. Joining the rat race are his suave colleague Ambrose (Dominic West), whom Johnny idolizes, and a ubiquitous white-haired Asian assassin, identified only as Killer Cleaner (Pik-Sen Lim), who poses as a cleaning woman pushing around a lethal weapon disguised as a vacuum cleaner. In one scene Johnny tackles a Killer Cleaner look-alike who turns out to be a stand-in for the queen of England.The movie coasts on the charms of its rubber-faced star and its witty, easygoing set pieces. One is a rooftop chase in which Johnny calmly uses an elevator and ladder to catch up with a fleeing villain who leaps out of windows. Another involves an office chair that rises and falls during a meeting at which the British prime minister, whom Johnny has just roundly insulted, sits on his left. Then there is the bouncing body bag with Johnny inside.In the climactic scene at a Swiss mountain retreat Johnny, under the influence of a mind-control drug, reprises classic moments of “The Manchurian Candidate” and The momentum of “Johnny English Reborn” is sedate, its attention span steady and its running jokes allowed to proceed without interruption. As the movie glides along, it may not elicit explosive laughter, but it plants a steady smile on your face and doesn’t leave you feeling molested. If that’s another way of saying “Johnny English Reborn” is old-fashioned, so be it.This movie is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). Mild violence and rude humor.JOHNNY ENGLISH REBORNOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by Oliver Parker; written by Hamish McColl, based on a story by William Davies; director of photography, Danny Cohen; edited by Guy Bensley; music by Ilan Eshkeri; production design by Jim Clay; costumes by Beatrix Pasztor; produced by Tim Bevan, Eric Fellner and Chris Clark; released by Universal Pictures. Running time: 1 hour 42 minutes.AdvertisementWITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on October 21, 2011, on Page C11 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;