To Rome With Love
6.3
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTT“Don’t psychoanalyze me! Many have tried. All have failed.”The significance of these lines, spoken by a retired music promoter named Jerry in “To Rome With Love,” is what a follower of Dr. Freud might call overdetermined. Jerry is played by I’m reminded of an exchange from Which just happens to be a city that Freud dreamed of often and initially struggled to visit, and also a place where American literary heroines like Henry James’s Daisy Miller came to test their innocence against the corruptions of Europe.The beginning of “To Rome With Love” suggests a return to this durable theme, as we observe a fresh-faced young woman, charmingly lost on her way to the Trevi Fountain, asking directions from a handsome young Italian man. Another ingénue falling into the sinister clutches of a Continental seducer? Not really. Her name is Hayley, she is played by AdvertisementRomantic complication can be found elsewhere, for example in the farcical temptations faced by Antonio (Alessandro Tiberi) and Milly (Alessandra Mastronardi), young newlyweds just arrived in Rome from AdvertisementHe is Jack, a fledgling architect — played, speaking of overdetermination, by Jack’s ordeal is witnessed by an older architect, John (One of the most delightful things about “To Rome With Love” is how casually it blends the plausible and the surreal, and how unabashedly it revels in pure silliness. The plots, which are cut together in no special order, obey different time schemes: Antonio and Milly’s marital drama (which involves a prostitute played by Penélope Cruz, and a movie star played by Antonio Albanese) seems to occupy a single afternoon, while other strands stretch over weeks and months. They rarely intersect, forming a shuffled, syncopated anthology, a variation on the multi-director omnibus films that were a staple of Italian cinema in the 1950s and ’60s.There was nothing especially French about “Midnight in Paris,” Marion Cotillard and Léa Seydoux notwithstanding. And though Mr. Allen is lionized as an auteur in France (almost as much as Clint Eastwood and Jerry Lewis), that country’s film tradition has not significantly informed his own work. While nothing matches his worship of Ingmar Bergman, Italian movies of various types — high and low, comic and tragic, kitschy and classic — have fed his imagination in ways obvious and implicit. (The closest thing he has done to a remake, “To Rome With Love” — a fairly generic title that reportedly replaced the more evocative “Bop Decameron” and “Nero Fiddled” — is full of affection for the motley patchwork of Italian culture. The soundtrack includes famous operatic passages and old-style romantic ballads, but also the kind of cheesy, synthetic pop that can, like some of the nation’s television productions, make a visitor wonder about Italy’s reputation for impeccable aesthetic judgment. And while we’re on that subject, Mr. Allen makes room for But Mr. Benigni, a gifted clown, is quite endearing as an ordinary, middle-class Roman plunged arbitrarily into a swirl of media celebrity, hounded by paparazzi (a species born and named in the Rome of His adventures are a blithe, surreal fable, a riff on themes Mr. Allen pursued with more aggression in The limitations of “To Rome With Love,” as frothy as the milk atop a cappuccino, are finally inseparable from its delights. Some of the scenes feel rushed and haphazardly constructed, and the dialogue frequently sounds overwritten and under-rehearsed. But this may just be to say that we are watching late-period Woody Allen. Complaining would be as superfluous — though also, perhaps, as inevitable — as psychoanalysis.Advertisement“To Rome With Love” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Many sexual hints are dropped, but very little clothing is shed.





A film review on Friday about &#8220;To Rome With Love,&#8221; the new Woody Allen movie, referred incorrectly to Sigmund Freud&#8217;s relationship to the Italian capital. While he was unable to visit Rome in the first part of his life &#8212; something he attributed, in his writings, to neurosis &#8212; he did go there in 1901 and several times thereafter; Rome was not somewhere he &#8220;never managed to visit.&#8221;A version of this review appears in print on June 22, 2012, on Page C10 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;