Enchanted
7.1
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe movies like to promise girls and women a happily ever after,  but it’s unusual that one delivers an ending that makes you feel unsullied and uncompromised, that doesn’t make you want to reach for your Simone de Beauvoir or a Taser. It’s a gently heretical redo, characterized by a script that   falters only  in the clinch, some agile if overly timid direction and a strong cast led by a  superb The once upon a time begins with the animated Giselle,  a pastel creation with a pointy chin and trilling voice, merrily chattering with her furry and feathered woodland friends. Although she isn’t scrubbing down the front steps in rags and clogs, Giselle has clearly been conceived, more thematically than visually, along the same lines as  classic Disney heroines  like  Snow White and Cinderella. She’s pretty, she’s perky, she’s flat (well, not entirely), and when she sings about her one true love,  it isn’t long before he emerges on horseback, answering her call with a Stephen Schwartz and Alan Menken refrain of his own. Hi ho, hi ho, it’s off to the chapel they would go if not for  his wicked,  witchy stepmother.One thing quickly leads to another until Giselle tumbles down a well and lands in New York, her drawn figure  suddenly made flesh. There, amid the bustling and hustling, she finds shelter with a guarded single father, Robert (In some ways  the film   never recovers from the anarchic joys  of this particular musical number, which is so flat-out bizarre and grotesquely funny — and executed straight, without knowing smirks — that it threatens to send the story off the rails. Part of this number’s  pleasure comes from the naughty thrill of watching a beloved, near-sacred film — in this case, AdvertisementIt would be too much to expect Disney to wholly dismantle  its own mythologies, thereby freeing young female hearts and minds from the curse of Prince Charming, so it’s no surprise that “Enchanted”  trips up  on its way to the finish. The windup disappoints, as does Susan Sarandon’s Queen Narissa, who enters in a bilious puff as if dressed for a fetish ball. The queen  arrives blessedly late to a party that lasts a remarkably long time, in part because of the dunderheaded Prince Edward (an excellent James Marsden), a crafty fly in the ointment (the equally stellar Timothy Spall) and a  computer-generated chipmunk called Pip (voiced by Mr. Lima and Jeff Bennett).  I’d gladly tell you about Pip’s close call with crucifixion, but I don’t want to scare the children.Advertisement“Enchanted” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). Pigeons and rats and water bugs, oh my. ENCHANTEDOpens today nationwide. Directed by Kevin Lima; written by Bill Kelly; director of photography, Don Burgess; hand-drawn animation supervisor, James Baxter; edited by Stephen A. Rotter and Gregory Perler; music by Alan Menken, with songs by Mr. Menken and Stephen Schwartz; production designer, Stuart Wurtzel; produced by Barry Josephson and Barry Sonnenfeld; released by Walt Disney Pictures. Running time: 1 hour 47 minutes.WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page E1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;