Moonrise Kingdom
7.8
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISWes Anderson, the director of "Moonrise Kingdom," discusses a scene from his film.Wes AndersonThe two young romantics in “Moonrise Kingdom,” which The film opens shortly before the two rendezvous in a field — she brings her favorite books in a suitcase; he brings her flowers and the camping gear — and head off on a journey that’s part quest, part romance, with a touch of film noir and a hint of the French New Wave. Along the way, there are dangers, both natural and human, and finally paradise, in a small, pretty cove they rename Moonrise Kingdom. (Working with his regular cinematographer, Robert Yeoman, Mr. Anderson softens the colors and gives them the slight tint of a faded Polaroid photograph.) There, with a tent, a French pop song and unembarrassed honesty (Sam warns Suzy that he may wet the bed), they consummate, metaphorically, an enchanted, chaste affair capped with a hilariously symbolic deflowering.Since his first feature in 1996, AdvertisementLike many of Mr. Anderson’s films, including his last one, the truly fantastic “AdvertisementA marvel of choreographed motion, machine and human, this overture introduces the Bishops, suggesting who they are and what they’re like (the books indicate that this is a reading family), and some crucial leitmotifs. A pair of binoculars points to the coming adventure (and suggests a far-reaching vision), and a kitten alludes to the vulnerability of the future adventurers.The children and parents are in separate rooms, a spatial configuration that underscores that they might as well inhabit separate universes (which they do). Early in the scene one of the boys puts on a record of Britten’s “The use of “Young Person’s Guide” — which introduces the individual instruments of an orchestra and then joins them in a fugue — is clever in that it underlines the construction and framework in a collaborative artwork like this film. “Clever” is sometimes used as a cudgel against Mr. Anderson (along with “twee” and “quirky”), primarily, it seems, because he makes personal, rather than industrial, films that don’t look, move or feel like anyone else’s. The people in his work, their passions and dramas, are true and recognizable — and rarely more deeply felt than in “Moonrise Kingdom” — but they exist in a world apart, one made with extraordinary detail, care and, I think, love by Mr. Anderson. Sometimes they’re called dollhouse worlds, though, truly, they feel more authentic than many screen realities.Mr. Anderson’s visual style and narratives, in other words, are his own. He draws you into his fantastical worlds with beauty and humor, and while their artifice can keep you at somewhat of a distance, this only deepens the story’s emotional power, especially when he lowers the boom, as he always does. The New England coastal island of Penzance, for instance, where “Moonrise Kingdom” takes place, is firmly set in Wes Anderson-land, as is the Bishops’ home and the scout camp that Sam runs away from. Like the Bishops, the Khaki Scouts at Camp Ivanhoe are initially something of an isolated ecosystem. Led by Scout Master Ward (Edward Norton), the boys do all the usual scouting things but with funny, alarming, strange twists, like building a tree house as high as an eagle’s aerie.As he does with the Bishop home, Mr. Anderson shoots the camp with a moving camera, one that follows Ward, in profile, during his morning inspection. Although you can see well into the distance, to the rolling, treed hills that serve as the camp’s backdrop, Mr. Anderson has shot the scene so that the depth of the image has been flattened. This visual compression makes the campsite look something like a page out of a book, and is even more obvious elsewhere, as in a long shot of a lighthouse, a car and a small building. That’s where the island’s law officer, Captain Sharp (a wonderful Bruce Willis), learns, soon after Sam and Suzy run off, that the boy is being given up by his foster parents because they’ve decided that he’s emotionally disturbed. Wouldn’t you be, with parents like these?Written by Mr. Anderson and Roman Coppola (they worked together several times before), “Moonrise Kingdom” breezes along with a beautifully coordinated admixture of droll humor, deadpan and slapstick. Like all of Mr. Anderson’s films, though, there’s a deep, pervasive melancholia here too, a sense of regret evident in Mr. Bishop’s slouch (with his plaid pants, he is a walking John Cheever tragedy) and in the way Captain Sharp and Mrs. Bishop look, and don’t look, at each other. Adulthood can seem so desperately painful, so maybe Sam and Suzy shouldn’t be quite as eager to grow up.But Sam and Suzy, while their story has the charms of a fairy tale and some of its terrors, aren’t playing at love. They are in love, and that is the most real thing in the world. “Moonrise Kingdom” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). There’s smoking, tent-sharing and a bloody ear-piercing.





A version of this review appears in print on May 25, 2012, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;