Star Trek Into Darkness
7.8
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTThe Times critic A. O. Scott reviews “Star Trek Into Darkness.”There is some intermittent complaining, in You get a bit of that in the beginning of the new movie, the second in the rebooted franchise directed by That hope is not entirely dashed. Mr. Pine and the rest of the cast, with some important new additions, continue to pay sharp and playful tribute to William Shatner, Leonard Nimoy and others who first made the voyage from small screen to big. The identity of the main villain cleverly connects the movie to some of the very best episodes from long ago. But all the same, it’s hard to emerge from “Into Darkness” without a feeling of disappointment, even betrayal. Maybe it is too late to lament the militarization of “Star Trek,” but in his pursuit of blockbuster currency, Mr. Abrams has sacrificed a lot of its idiosyncrasy and, worse, the large-spirited humanism that sustained it.In some of his television work — notably AdvertisementAfter increasingly noisy and bloated starship battles, “Into Darkness” reaches a climax with the smashing of a North American city followed by a long fistfight on a flying metal platform. It’s uninspired hackwork, and the frequent appearance of blue lens flares does not make this movie any more of a personal statement. Mr. Abrams will never be Michael Bay, who can make kinetic poetry out of huge pieces of machinery smashing together. Why should he want to be?The good people at Paramount have asked me not to say too much about the plot, so I won’t, except to note that it is pretty dumb and sometimes needlessly muddled. A terrorist bomb explodes in London (which, along with San Francisco, has a pretty cool futuristic makeover), and the hunt for the perpetrator leads to the uncovering of treachery within the Federation hierarchy and the threat of a war with the Klingons. Young Kirk, a hothead and a tomcat, is at risk of losing his ship, both physically and symbolically, as he navigates his daddy issues in the shadow of Captain Pike (Bruce Greenwood) and Starfleet Admiral Marcus (Peter Weller), a militaristic high muckety-muck in the Starfleet.But story has always been the most disposable element in the “Star Trek” universe, and Mr. Abrams and the screenwriters (AdvertisementThe half-man, half-Vulcan at the center of those relationships — and also the logical thorn in the emotive side of Dr. McCoy (Karl Urban) — is one of the great characters in American popular culture, and Mr. Quinto slyly and respectfully revises our sense of him. His performance is witty and self-aware but also entirely serious, and his Spock is at once the ship’s stoical straight man and the guy with all the best jokes.“Star Trek” is essentially “The Office” in space: an endless workplace comedy with bittersweet moments and secondary characters who spring vividly out of the background. (Here is the place to mention the scene-stealing Mr. Cumberbatch, pale and intense, has become the object of a “Star Trek Into Darkness” does not quite stand by itself as a satisfying movie, but then again it doesn’t need to. It is the leg of a journey that has, remarkably, lasted for nearly half a century. I hope we never tire of Kirk, Spock and the others. I also hope that they stick around long enough to find a new civilization, since the one we have now does not fully appreciate their gifts.“Star Trek Into Darkness” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Some naughty words and deeds, and the usual large-scale, largely bloodless action-movie violence.





A version of this review appears in print on May 16, 2013, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;