Blue Jasmine
7.3
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe Times critic Manohla Dargis reviews "Blue Jasmine."When She’s in the Mission, for starters, but Jasmine French — this lost, lonely woman brilliantly brought to quivering life by Ms. Blanchett — is more properly in a Woody Allen movie, his most sustained, satisfying and resonant film since “Match Point.” A moral fable about greed and comeuppance, crimes and misdemeanors, “Blue Jasmine” begins with a socialite brought low and evolves into a tragedy that becomes far greater than her own. It’s a familiar story with a few of the usual suspects, starting with the husband, Hal (a perfect Blanchett, Blanche — the names seem fated for each. Mr. Allen has said that he didn’t see Ms. Blanchett play Tennessee Williams’s most famous creation in Liv Ullmann’s celebrated 2009 production of “A Streetcar Named Desire” at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. (Jasmine’s appalled aside about being forced to move to Brooklyn after being priced out of Manhattan amusingly suggests why he didn’t.) Whatever his inspiration, he has been rummaging around in the classics for decades, so his appropriation of “Streetcar” doesn’t surprise. What does is his reimagining Blanche by way of another figure who changes depending on how you hold her up to the light, Ruth Madoff, the wife of Bernard L. Madoff, the investor turned avatar of a fallen world. It’s a masterly stroke that puts Jasmine’s dissembling into fresh, chilling perspective.From the moment Jasmine appears on screen she’s broken, and her contradictions — along with the vodka she guzzles and the Xanax she pops — keep her in pieces. She’s pathetic, absurd, complaining about being broke one minute and explaining why she flew first class the next. As she slips from tremulous flirtations to soused meltdowns, she elicits gasps of compassion and snorts of derision. Jasmine, née Jeanette, having reinvented herself, had risen to become a member of New York’s elite but, with everything gone, has come to San Francisco to move in with her sister, Ginger (played with anxious sincerity by AdvertisementIt’s hard to know if Mr. Allen shares Jasmine’s shock at Ginger’s place. (Mere mortals will note the ample square footage, natural light and fireplace.) With a series of sharp contrapuntal flashbacks that move forward in time — Hal and Jasmine in their empty new Park Avenue apartment and then later presiding over a dinner bathed in light so burnished golden calf must have been on the menu — Mr. Allen illustrates just how drastically she’s been humbled. The flashbacks tell part of the story, as does Jasmine’s faraway stare, her mood swings and the patter that telegraphs her privilege (“I don’t know how anyone can breathe with low ceilings”) and which, over time, will sound like the ravings of a homeless woman you might see in certain neighborhoods, the one in ratty furs pushing a cart.AdvertisementOnce moved in with Ginger, Jasmine flutters about, cementing her resemblance to the mothlike Blanche. The allusions to “Streetcar” are copious and obvious, and spotting the quotations initially feels like a kind of humorous parlor game, from the French connection that links Blanche and Jasmine’s names to Mr. Allen’s staging of a violent skirmish, which echoes a similar one in Elia Kazan’s film adaptation. Underscoring the resemblances, Jasmine repeatedly explains that “Blue Moon” was playing when she met Hal, memories that evoke the blue piano that, as Williams wrote in “Streetcar,” expresses “the spirit of the life which goes on here.” In the play, Blanche also says that Stanley isn’t the type who goes for jasmine perfume, an aside that carries an accusation.The specter of Stanley and his white undershirt lives on, if with critical differences, in the figures of Ginger’s ex-husband, Augie (Andrew Dice Clay), and her current lover, Chili (That’s harsh and also conveniently reductive: Jasmine may be guilty of a great deal, including blinkered entitlement, but the world of big money in which she moved played its role. So, too, did Hal, perhaps the story’s only real villain, but who, like Augie and Chili, never emerges as a serious countervailing force to Jasmine as Stanley is to Blanche. As if to make up for this missing piece, Mr. Allen himself advances the strongest argument against Jasmine. If he never succeeds in diminishing her appeal, it’s both because Ms. Blanchett maintains a vise grip on the character’s humanity and because it becomes inexorably clear that, while losing her money helped push Jasmine over the edge, it was also the dirty, easy money, what it promised and delivered, that drove her nuts to begin with.What did Jasmine know, and when did she know it? These questions come to haunt “Blue Jasmine,” and as the past catches up with the present, they help drive this moving, sometimes funny film toward its shattering end. If at times Mr. Allen seems to be answering those questions by pulling the film in one direction even as Ms. Blanchett pulls it in another, this productive dissonance deepens the tension and stakes and, as with a climactic confrontation between Jasmine and Hal, can turn a raw scene into a revelation. This particular battle takes place in their living room, a mausoleumlike shrine to their wealth, painted green, where, against the color of money, they fight for their lives, frantically taking swings at each other without a thought to everyone else they are about to take down.“Blue Jasmine” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Adult behavior and language.





A version of this review appears in print on July 26, 2013, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;