The Adjustment Bureau
7.1
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGIS“Who is George Nolfi?” a colleague whispered when the final credits began to roll for “The Adjustment Bureau,” a fast, sure film about finding and keeping love across time and space. Good question. If the fates allow — or perhaps, as in this very enjoyable movie, the men in gray suits and fedoras permit and “things go according to plan” — you should be hearing more from Mr. Nolfi, a screenwriter turned director who has brightened the season with a witty mix of science-fiction metaphysics and old-fashioned fluttery romance.Matt DamonThe wide contours of that rabbit hole are laid out in “Adjustment Team,” the Mr. Nolfi has made assorted, um, adjustments to the original story — David’s world doesn’t disintegrate, it pauses like a stuck clock — though his largest shift is turning a metaphysical speculation into an existential crisis. After bombing out of the political game David enters into business with his old campaign manager, Charlie (Michael Kelly, who could be Eliot Spitzer’s cousin). Then one strange day David stumbles into a boardroom crowded with immobilized colleagues and busily moving strangers, some wearing gray suits, others dressed in more menacing black. He tries to flee but is caught by the interlopers, one of whom, Richardson (John Slattery), explains that by meeting Elise, David is not following their plan. Like any sane person he responds by trying to make a run for it again, but that’s not in their plan either.The detour that Elise inadvertently forces David down is not to the strangers’ liking, a situation that leads to tricky, niftily staged cat-and-mouse chase scenes involving some amusing creative geography. But David is as much a captive to Elise as a fugitive from those meddlesome strangers, and he’s also caught between seemingly contradictory forces: his ambition and his heart. In other words, despite the title, the film is less a freak-out about the nature of existence (the world of ash that Dick wrote about) and more about a struggle for love, a more familiar (at the movies), if essential, fight. Whether running or kissing or running and kissing (well, almost), Mr. Damon and Ms. Blunt turn romance into a palpable race.AdvertisementIf Mr. Nolfi doesn’t go deep in “The Adjustment Bureau,” drilling down to where it hurts (he would rather entertain than pain you), he skates on the gray-blue surfaces of his film with confidence. Along with his likable, confidently sexy leads and an excellent troika in Mr. Slattery, AdvertisementOne reason filmmakers like Mr. Nolfi seem attracted to “The Adjustment Bureau” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Strong language and relatively mild violence, including car crashes.THE ADJUSTMENT BUREAUOpens on Friday  nationwide. Written and directed by George Nolfi, based on the short story “Adjustment Team”  by WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on March 4, 2011, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;