Warcraft
7.1
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISProbably the best way to experience “Warcraft,” a generally amusing and sometimes visually arresting absurdity, is stoned. If watching the big screen through a cannabis cloud isn’t your idea of a good movie time, though, I suggest that you do what I did and just go with the incoherent flow. You may not grasp who the Bluto-like creatures with simian arms and woolly mammoth tusks are or why they seem permanently engorged with rage. But there’s more to movies than narrative coherency, as anyone who has sampled the cinema of Michael Bay or certain art films well knows.There is in this movie, for starters, the visual appeal of those Blutoesque beings, lovingly fabricated and ornamented motion-capture creations who share their name with the creatures that J. R. R. Tolkien called orcs. Tolkien borrowed orc from the Old English, The Times critic Manohla Dargis reviews “Warcraft.”If there’s a mythology here, I missed it, much as I also missed the charm and periodic lightness of Tolkien’s world, with its hobbits and Shire. “Warcraft” by contrast weighs in as a Hobbesian war of all against all, though it does allow for a little romance and campy winks. It also, more surprisingly, offers some gray-shading, notably with Durotan (Even so, despite the incessant clashing and clanging, you can hear the tremulous pulse of a heartbeat. That faint thrumming belongs to Duncan Jones, the director who, against the odds, has mined a watchable movie out of an entertainment franchise that started with a video game and now includes novels, comics and assorted schlock (toys, costumes, a mah-jongg set). That Mr. Jones even factors into this production counts as some kind of actual achievement given that “Warcraft” is such an obvious bid at brand expansion, which may be why no one bothered with an intelligible story. Apparently, branded content (i.e., the characters, their world) was meant to be enough.Whether you see more here will depend on your mileage and patience, though moviegoers habituated to he-men (and the perfunctory she) pulverizing one another for 100 or so minutes are likely to have greater tolerance for this diversion than others might. As suggested, trying to figure out who’s doing what to whom and why — or how orcs dress with such huge hands or how they chew steak with those tusks — is often pointless when it comes to spectacles. In cinema’s earliest years, moviegoers thrilled not to stories but what the scholar Tom Gunning calls “the cinema of attractions,” with its eye-pummeling shocks and tricks; we’re still getting pummeled, story or no.Mr. Jones doubles down on the action, though without any real shocks (or awe), but he also modestly complicates the question of the monstrous. The orcs in “Warcraft” prove somewhat more psychologically complex than any number of cartoon Hollywood villains — they’re sincere, for one — and they’re generally better company than the king and his crew. It says something about Mr. Jones’s choices that he gives Durotan so much screen time and that Advertisement“Warcraft” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Heads pop like grapes and so forth. Running time: 2 hours 3 minutes.





A version of this review appears in print on June 10, 2016, on Page C11 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;