Max Payne
5.4
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTI think it was when bursts of flame filled the Manhattan night and giant winged creatures smacked against skyscraper windows like bugs on windshields that I began to lose the narrative thread of Up until then it seemed more or less clear. Some people had wings tattooed on their arms, and they all seemed to be hooked on a blue liquid developed by a pharmaceutical company where the hero’s wife worked before she was murdered, along with their child, by some people with wings tattooed on their arms. The weather in New York alternated between fluttering snow and driving rain, and every time someone fired  a gun the images slowed down and the sound mix cleared out so you  could hear the plink of a bullet casing as it  hit the ground. Meanwhile, Max Payne (Which gives “Max Payne,” directed by John Moore from a script by Beau Thorne, a measure of integrity. It’s not an especially good movie, but such a judgment is not really relevant to its ambitions. It is content to be an efficient vehicle for the delivery of a familiar range of sensations, some of which almost rise to the level of feelings. Though a sexy woman in a skimpy dress (next-wave Bond Girl Olga Kurylenko) shows up to tempt Max, lust is not really on the menu. Instead, the film’s momentum is derived from the grim, ruthless self-pity of the lone avenger.Max Payne, a solo shooter moving through hallways, alleys and empty rooms, is a figure handed down from movies to video games and nowadays, increasingly, handed back. Mr. Moore does a fairly good job of adapting the cinematic aspects of first-person shooter games back into cinema, and in devising a coherent color scheme and sound design for Max’s escapades.AdvertisementA coherent story would be a lot to ask, and would in any case slow down the movie’s rhythm. Max’s righteous anger finds various allies and targets, though it is not always clear who is which. They are played by Mila Kunis, Beau Bridges and Ludacris with just enough panache and expressiveness to uphold the (increasingly irrelevant) distinction between a movie and a video game.“Max Payne” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). The brutal violence has been cleansed of blood, the swearing avoids the really bad words and when Ms. Kurylenko is topless she is filmed from the back.MAX PAYNEOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by John Moore; written by Beau Thorne; director of photography, Jonathan Sela; edited by Dan Zimmerman; music by Marco Beltrami and Buck Sanders; production designer, Daniel T. Dorrance; produced by Mr. Moore, Julie Yorn and Scott Faye; released by 20th Century Fox. Running time: 1 hour 40 minutes.WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page C17 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;