Leap Year
6.4
AdvertisementBy JEANNETTE CATSOULISMaking sadomasochism appear less erotic than stamp collecting, As nondescript as her depressingly middling apartment — where we will remain for the duration of the film — Laura is painfully lonely. The one-night stands who leave quietly in the morning light are as unreachable as the contentedly cohabiting neighbors whose domestic bliss taunts her. But she is also strong and practical (when she loses one job, she immediately talks her way into another), and as adept at dealing with sexual frustration as with loss of income.Enter Arturo (Gustavo Sánchez Parra), a quiet stud with a fighter’s body and a tendency to slap and spank. Coming alive for the first time, Laura eggs him on, and the film creates a lovely asymmetry between their increasingly dangerous coupling and postcoital coziness. We are unprepared, however, for the casual revelation that their sexual synchronicity may derive from very different places and be headed toward very different goals.The first feature from the Australian-born, Mexico-based writer and director Michael Rowe, “Leap Year” shocks only with its candor and complete lack of dramatic manipulation. While Juan Mandel Sepulveda’s gorgeously textured photography adds warmth and shields against sterility, Mr. Rowe frames Laura’s extreme sexual behavior with the same detachment he applies to her eating habits and ritual calendar markings. There’s a reason she’s counting down the days to Feb. 29, but it is far less crucial to our appreciation of the film than to Laura’s appreciation of her life.LEAP YEAROpens on Friday in Manhattan. Directed by Michael Rowe; written by Mr. Rowe and Lucia Carreras; director of photography, Juan Manuel Sepulveda; edited by Óscar Figueroa Jara; art direction by Alisarine Ducolomb; produced by Edher Campos and Luis Salinas; released by Strand Releasing. At the Cinema Village, 22 East 12th Street, East Village. In Spanish, with English subtitles. Running time: 1 hour 34 minutes. This film is not rated.WITH: Mónica del Carmen (Laura), Gustavo Sánchez Parra (Arturo) and Marco Zapata (Raul).





A version of this review appears in print on June 24, 2011, on Page C8 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;