Eagle Eye
6.6
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTT“Eagle Eye”Shia LaBeoufSo far, so good. The principals are a bit confused about what’s happening to them, and so is the audience, but that’s as it should be. Are Jerry and Rachel, who have been receiving menacing phone calls from a mysterious woman with an accentless, affectless voice, patsies in a terrorist conspiracy?It seems that way, but then again, why would a terrorist organization with the capacity to hack into cellphone lines, construction cranes, city buses and security cameras need to mess with stressed-out ordinary citizens? Maybe it’s not terrorism at all but some kind of government conspiracy. Or maybe ...I won’t spoil what the makers of “Eagle Eye” (including four credited screenwriters) surely regard as an ingenious plot twist. There’s no point. By the time you learn what’s really going on, you will no longer care. You will instead most likely be occupied in the sleep-delaying exercise of listing all the simpler, better movies this one resembles and in whose company it might have belonged.AdvertisementThe basic premise — that Rachel and Jerry are at the mercy of a disembodied voice that knows exactly what they’re doing and can force them to do things they don’t want to — has a certain sinister elegance. Mr. Thornton, as an F.B.I. agent, is an entertaining fountain of profane folksiness. And Mr. Caruso, who showed some decent genre chops in But unlike “Disturbia,” which confined itself to a single set and one basic narrative problem — is the guy next door a serial killer? — “Eagle Eye” churns and flails and piles on pointless and improbable complications. Jerry has a dead twin brother. Rachel’s son plays the trumpet. There’s a top-secret explosive weapon, and a top-secret computer application, and a top-secret contingency plan to overthrow the government.Additionally, there is some obligatory mock-topical chatter (“blah blah blah “Eagle Eye” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Lots of explosions and gunfire, but no sex or gore or really bad language.EAGLE EYEOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page E15 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;