The Avengers
8.1
Advertisement A.&#160;O. SCOTTScientists estimate that we reached Peak Superhero in the summer of 2008, when You may occasionally encounter (as I have, a few times in the past months) a walking relic of an earlier era of pop-cultural fandom who wonders if they have, at last, made another movie out of that fondly recalled So The secret of “The Avengers” is that it is a snappy little dialogue comedy dressed up as something else, that something else being a giant A.T.M. for Marvel and its new studio overlords, the Walt Disney Company. At times — when various members of a game and nimble cast amble in and out of the glassy, metallic chambers of a massive flying aircraft carrier, cracking wise, rolling eyes and occasionally throwing a punch — the movie has some of the easygoing charm of AdvertisementThe difference is that, in keeping with the imperatives of global franchise entertainment, the big shootout in “The Avengers” must be enormous, of a scale and duration that obliterates everything else. A hole opens in the sky, disgorging metallic warriors on Jet Skis and big snakey things that inflict serious digital damage on the Manhattan skyline. Before that there are similarly overdone combat sequences. None of them matches, in cinematic wit or visceral surprise, a sucker punch landed by the Hulk on Thor’s lantern jaw or a cartoonish smackdown delivered by that same angry green fellow on Loki, Thor’s adoptive brother and this episode’s main villain.AdvertisementLoki (Tom Hiddleston), a disgraced Asgardian princeling with a Mr. Jackson, with an eye patch and his well-practiced bellow, is more master of ceremonies than mission commander, and under his watch the Avengers indulge in some Rat Pack-y horsing around. Captain America (“I’m always angry,” he says at one point, and while “The Avengers” is hardly worth raging about, its failures are significant and dispiriting. The light, amusing bits cannot overcome the grinding, hectic emptiness, the bloated cynicism that is less a shortcoming of this particular film than a feature of the genre. Mr. Whedon’s playful, democratic pop sensibility is no match for the glowering authoritarianism that now defines Hollywood’s comic-book universe. Some of the rebel spirit of Mr. Whedon’s early projects “I aim to misbehave,” “Marvel’s The Avengers” is rated PG-13. Blam. Splat. Kapow. Mostly bloodless.





A version of this review appears in print on May 4, 2012, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;