The Bridges of Madison County
7.5
Before we get to the picturesque Iowa landmarks immortalized by Robert James  Waller's unstoppable book, let's talk about another bridge. It stretches between Brooklyn and Manhattan, and I'll sell it to anyone who thinks "The Bridges of Madison County" has the sincerity, sex appeal, literary merit or entertainment value to justify its incredible popularity over the last three years. 

     Arguably the world's longest greeting card, "The Bridges of Madison County" sentimentalizes the four-day affair between an Italian-born, middle-aged farm wife whose passionate nature has long been dormant and a ridiculously romantic drifter. As a public service none of Mr. Waller's prose will be quoted here, but his fans may well have committed it to memory. For anyone else, it curdles milk. 
By rights, a film version ought to have the same effect. But Clint Eastwood, director and alchemist, has transformed "The Bridges of Madison County" into something bearable -- no, something even better. Limited by the vapidity of this material while he trims its excesses with the requisite machete, Mr. Eastwood locates a moving, elegiac love story at the heart of Mr. Waller's self-congratulatory overkill. The movie has leanness and surprising decency, and Meryl Streep has her best role in years. 

     Looking sturdy and voluptuous in her plain housedress (the year is 1965), Ms. Streep rises straight out of "Christina's World" to embody all the loneliness and fierce yearning Andrew Wyeth captured on canvas. And yet, despite the Iowa setting and the emphasis on down-home Americana, Mr. Eastwood's "Bridges of Madison County" has a European flavor. Its pace is unhurried, which is not the same as slow. It respects long silences and pays attention to small details. It  sustains an austere tone and staves off weepiness until the last reel. It voices musings that would definitely sound better in French. 

     And it listens seriously to this story's two main characters when they speak, even if they happen to be speaking in soggy Wallerese and delivering the occasional wild howler. Admittedly, it takes some adjustment to watch Mr. Eastwood adopt his "Make my day" squint and declare: "I don't want to need you if I can't have you" or "This kind of certainty comes but once in a lifetime." 

     Those who admire this actor for his steely machismo should know that he picks flowers, quotes Yeats, wears a bracelet and says things like: "You know, I scribbled some thin' down the other day. I often do that when I'm on the road, and it kinda goes like this . . ." 

     That's the sound of Robert Kincaid: sensitive artist, itinerant photographer, citizen of the world, poet and a half. He's the kind of fellow who likes to notice -- and talk about -- the soil's loamy smell. But on screen, despite all that, the flinty Mr. Eastwood makes him mercifully laconic and at times even charming. When it comes to making anyone's day, Mr. Eastwood accomplishes that by turning this story's hero into someone the audience can stand. 

     "The Bridges of Madison County" is savvy enough to recognize what it's up against and tackle that resistance head-on. Without opening fanfare the film simply starts, framed by the reading of the farm wife's will to her two children, who have failed to notice some rather life-altering things about Mom.  Though this prologue is clumsily acted, it accomplishes what it must, hooking the audience before Francesca (Ms. Streep) even appears. Jeannine Oppewall's wonderfully evocative production design summons up the blunt, homey Francesca before the character herself is even seen. 

     (Beyond one much-quoted volume of Yeats, in this pre-Waller time period, there doesn't seem to be a book in the house.) 

     When Ms. Streep materializes in flashback, setting out white bread and ketchup on the kitchen table for her family's dinner, and dreamily listening to  opera even though her children prefer pop songs, she's a very different woman from any she has played before. There's a carnality to this performance that makes sense of the character's longings and gives flesh to Mr. Waller's overheated daydreams. 

     As Francesca straightens her dress or touches her mouth or smooths loose wisps of hair, Ms. Streep conveys a sexual tension that the film's languid pace helps heighten. She does a remarkable job of suggesting this isolated woman's long-lost hopes and dreams. Not to mention her astonishment at suddenly  finding Clint Eastwood peeling carrots in her kitchen while her husband and children conveniently spend four days with a prize steer at the Iowa State Fair. 

     Suspending a lot less disbelief than Mr. Waller's readers had to, the film's  audience must accept Robert Kincaid's magical arrival in mid-nowhere to photograph covered bridges for National Geographic; he refers to this as "the work." It must also buy Francesca's willingness to let him first into her remote farmhouse, then into her life. And somehow, to the extent that a talky, uneventful two-character story can escalate from vegetable peeling to grand passion, this film very nearly hits its mark. 

     When that passion arrives, both these actors do more kissing on screen than either has done in a whole career, yet the tone isn't torrid. Instead of frankly sexual, it's fond, cuddly and warmly affectionate, confirming the sense that this story's romance-novel sensibility reflects a conventionally feminine point  of view. 

     To say that Mr. Eastwood has done the best imaginable job of directing "The Bridges of Madison County" is not to say that he has done the impossible. No one really could have made this book's romantic fantasies feasible in the flesh. Still, Mr. Eastwood instills this story with the same soulful, reflective tone that has elevated his last few films, and with the wistful notion that life's great opportunities deserve to be taken. 

     Although the film registers some confusion about the effect Francesca's story is supposed to have on her children, it does an admirable job of championing adventurous emotions and avoiding too many inadvertent giggles. Richard LaGravenese's adaptation of this book is as tacitly ingenious as his work on "A  Little Princess" and Diane Keaton's forthcoming "Unstrung Heroes." 

     However unexpectedly well this film works, the acid test is whether those unfamiliar with Mr. Waller's book would see why this story has exerted such an astounding grip on the world's imagination. They wouldn't. But that's all right. Plenty of readers don't get it, either. 

     "The Bridges of Madison County" is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned).  It includes profanity, nudity and sexual situations. 

  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY 

  Directed by Clint Eastwood; written by Richard LaGravenese, based on the novel by Robert James Waller; director of photography, Jack N. Green; edited by Joel Cox; music by Lennie Niehaus; production designer, Jeannine Oppewall; produced by Mr. Eastwood and Kathleen Kennedy; released by Warner Brothers. Running time: 135 minutes. This film is rated PG-13. 

  WITH: Clint Eastwood (Robert Kincaid), Meryl Streep (Francesca Johnson), Annie Corley (Caroline Johnson), Victor Slezak (Michael Johnson) and Jim Haynie (Richard Johnson). 
