The Lucky One
6.5
Advertisement A.&#160;O. SCOTT“Of course they killed someone,” I overheard a young woman say to her friend after a screening of So yes, someone dies. Usually more than one person, and there is also usually a serious illness. The setting is the coastal South — typically the Carolinas, this time Louisiana — a land of lazy waters, busy dialect coaches and very few nonwhite faces. A young man and a young woman will fall in love, but there will be complications: a rival with a superior pedigree, a secret, bad weather. Desperate yearning will erupt into urgent kissing, ideally in heavy rain (or, in this case, an outdoor shower, under which the smoochers stand fully clothed).All of this will be conducted in an atmosphere of intense spirituality carefully scrubbed of overt reference to any particular religion. The story, while thick with grief, emphasizes redemption, and the idea of an inscrutable but ultimately benevolent destiny comes up frequently in the characters’ conversations. The sun breaks through the clouds, you smile through your tears, and your cynicism — even the tiny voice in your head crying out, “As I was saying: a Nicholas Sparks movie. But they are hardly all identical. Sometimes the plot is a welter of chaotic incident, like in Back to AdvertisementThis may at first seem hard to reconcile with the fact that he is played by And let us give credit to a movie that acknowledges — like another Nicholas Sparks picture, AdvertisementAfter a bloody firefight, Logan finds a snapshot in the rubble. The owner can’t be found, so he holds onto it and comes to believe that the pretty young woman in the picture and the message on the back (“Stay safe,” adorned with a cross) are partly responsible for his survival.When he returns home, traumatized and lonely, he decides to seek out his guardian angel and thank her. That he finds the girl — walking from Colorado all the way to the bayou with his dog to do so — is far from the most incredible thing that happens. And it might, in another kind of movie, seem a little creepy. Viewed from a slightly different angle, “The Lucky One” is about a troubled stalker in the grip of the delusion that he is linked to his prey by fate.But Logan, haunted though he may be, is thoroughly benign, and whatever suspicions Beth (Taylor Schilling) might have when she meets him are dismissed by her wise and salty grandmother (Blythe Danner). They live, along with Beth’s adorable, curly-haired son, Ben (Riley Thomas Stewart) — the cute kid being another Sparksian axiom — in a big, beautiful old house and operate a dog kennel on the property.Logan takes a job there, charms Ben and Grandma and chips away at Beth’s skepticism. Her ex-husband (Jay R. Ferguson), a sheriff’s deputy with political connections and a nasty attitude, is suspicious of this handsome newcomer and promises to make trouble for him.Perhaps I have already said too much, since part of the experience of a Nicholas Sparks movie is encountering revelations and reversals in the plot that challenge your sense of the preposterous. That’s how destiny works: unlikely incidents pile up, good intentions go awry, and — well, see above. If realism is what you’re after, you’ll do better at “The Lucky One” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Wet kissing, followed by a montage that is kind of steamy by the standards of the genre.





A version of this review appears in print on April 20, 2012, on Page C12 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;