Fantastic Four
5.7
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTThe opening scenes of “Fantastic Four” — 20th Century Fox’s reboot of its Marvel superhero franchise — take place in 2007, which happens to be the year that the second movie in the prerebooted franchise (“Rise of the Silver Surfer”) was released. Ben Grimm and Reed Richards (played as children by Evan Hannemann and Owen Judge, later by Jamie Bell and The Times critic A.O. Scott reviews “The Fantastic Four.”Some of us have long memories, though, and can summon the bad cinema of the mid-aughts with furious clarity. Looking back on those days, I remember — Jessica Alba. O.K., forget it. I’ll just go ahead and reboot my 2005 This “Fantastic Four,” directed by In this contemporary reimagining of Marvel’s original and longest-running superhero team, “Fantastic Four” joins four young outsiders as they teleport to a dangerous alternate universe.Reed is working on a teleporting machine that attracts the attention of Franklin Storm (Reg E. Cathey), who runs some kind of boarding school/research center in Manhattan. There, Reed meets the Storm kids, Sue the scientist (Kate Mara) and Johnny the hot-rodder (Michael B. Jordan), and also a brooding intellectual named Victor von Doom (Much later, after they have traveled to a parallel dimension where a planet full of energy (please just fill in whatever exposition you feel will get you to the next part of this sentence), Victor will face down his erstwhile classmates and say: “There is no more Victor. There is only DOOM!” There is nothing wrong with that kind of line — he’s a newly fledged ultravillain in a comic-book movie, after all — but it needs to be earned, with gravity or wit. The best superhero entertainments have both.“Fantastic Four,” despite the dogged efforts of its talented young cast, has nothing. The special effects are at about the level of the early ““Fantastic Four” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Death rays. 





A version of this review appears in print on August 7, 2015, on Page C5 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;