Burlesque
6.4
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe old bump and grind receives a squeaky-clean workout in Cher plays Tess, the proprietress of one of those atmospheric holes in the wall where dreams turn into realities — or at least a savvy combination of a Disney tween program and a Lifetime weepie. It’s a perfect platter for the plucky Iowan dish, Ali, played by the pop singer Alas, both her moves and her feature-film debut are perversely tame (no spanky-panky here, unlike in  “Dirrty”), closer to your grandmother’s fan dance than to the neo-burlesque revues that began popping up in the early 1990s. As performed by troupes like “Burlesque” nods, though more rightly wags its derrière, in the direction of new burlesque, but it’s strictly old school — at times, really old school — with a story line that had already gathered dust by the time the choreographer Busby Berkeley pointed his camera up the collective skirt of the chorus in the 1933 musical AdvertisementAs in that old-studio gem, the story in “Burlesque” unwinds both onstage and off, a twinned perspective that in most backstage musicals helps define the line between ostensible real life and performance. No such line exists in this movie, either because the writer and director, Steven Antin, hasn’t a clue what real life looks like, or he actually does and has opted to sweeten these worlds with the same softly diffused, caramelized light.So instead of hard times of the sort faced by chorines in Depression-era musicals, Ali struggles, well, not very much at all. Soon after she lands a waitress job at the Burlesque Lounge, she takes to the stage where, to the surprise of no one but the other characters (including Stanley Tucci as Sean, Tess’s wisecracking, i.e. gay, assistant), she begins exercising her buns of steel and lungs of iron. Tess, meanwhile, spends her time trading quips with her own There are also a few straight male characters to keep Ali busy offstage, notably the good boy with the cool motorcycle, Jack (Cam Gigandet), who bartends at the lounge, and the bad boy with the expensive sports car, Marcus (Eric Dane), who wants to buy the club. Both are bland, pretty and sexless, just like the movie. Mostly they are guarantors of Ali’s heterosexuality, even if neither inspires the same ecstatic reverie she exhibits when she sees the female dancers perform for the first time. There’s a suggestion of a more interesting movie in the rapturous look on Ali’s face when she watches these women, something that registers as more forceful than mere admiration and edges close to a visceral sense of desire.AdvertisementGiven that she spends much of the movie onstage, singing and dancing in what is essentially a succession of music videos linked with backstage filler, Ms. Aguilera doesn’t have much time to embarrass herself. She’s a serviceable screen presence who has a voice and an occasional song (Etta James’s “Tough Lover”) big enough to keep her from sliding off screen. It’s a dutiful, stolid performance in a movie that quickly proves achingly dull, with none of the madness, verve or talent of Paul Verhoeven’s “Burlesque” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Ladies in lingerie shaking and shimmying. BURLESQUEOpens on Wednesday  nationwide. Written and directed by Steven Antin; director of photography, Bojan Bazelli; edited by Virginia Katz; music by Christophe Beck; choreography by Denise Faye and Joey Pizzi; production design by Jon Gary Steele; costumes by Michael Kaplan; produced by Donald De Line; released by Screen Gems. Running time: 1 hour 40 minutes.WITH: Cher (Tess), 





A version of this review appears in print on November 24, 2010, on Page C11 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;