The Illusionist
7.6
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISIf the tall man with the stiff, lurching walk and sad, baggy eyes in Directed by The illusionist’s lonely gloom brightens when, while performing in a pub in an isolated Scottish village, he finds an appreciative audience of one in the form of a teenager, Alice. The two shyly hit it off despite their different languages, communicating with gestures and few words. The illusionist murmurs an occasional “non,” while Alice speaks in sporadic bleats, a minimalism that recalls how Tati used fragments of dialogue more for their noise than for their meaning. To watch — and listen — to his films and “The Illusionist” is to be reminded of how much useless jabbering there is in movies. (The illusionist’s few words are voiced by Jean-Claude Donda, while Alice’s are supplied by Eilidh Rankin.)Despite the absence of dialogue, a story nevertheless emerges, clearly if not loudly, in the relationship that develops between the two characters. The illusionist has come to the dramatically, moodily hued island village, at the invitation of an enthusiastic admirer, a Scot with a deep thirst and a flirty kilt.  One day the illusionist notices Alice’s shabby shoes (she works in the pub swabbing floors and washing clothes) and buys her a pair of bright red AdvertisementCreated with both hand-drawn and computer-generated animation, “The Illusionist” is more constrained, visually and narratively, than Mr. Chomet’s last (and first) feature film, the raucous, trippy AdvertisementThe relationship between Alice and her protector is thin by comparison and grows increasingly coy. Though she looks like a child when they meet, Alice isn’t the little girl her wardrobe initially suggests. And when they move in together, the illusionist quickly assures her (or the audience) that she can have the bedroom while he takes the sofa. As her taste in pretty things grows, and her Mary Janes are replaced by heels, the two are pulled in separate directions, partly because he has to work harder to support her tastes. This separation allows Mr. Chomet to dodge any Lolita-like complications, yet it also means that the bond remains more vaporously sentimental than deeply felt. The illusionist — whether he’s pulling a string of lights from his mouth or selling brassieres in shop windows — is the film’s true charm.As a footnote, after I saw “The Illusionist” I learned that it has been sharply criticized by Tati’s grandson, Richard Tatischeff Schiel McDonald, who claims  that the story was inspired by Tati’s guilt over abandoning his daughter Helga Marie-Jeanne, Mr. McDonald’s mother. His complaints have been circulated in the British news media, and in May Roger Ebert posted a long “The Illusionist” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). Smoking and drinking, and a near suicide. THE ILLUSIONISTOpens on Saturday  in New York and Los Angeles. Directed and edited by WITH THE VOICES OF: Jean-Claude Donda (the Illusionist/French Cinema Manager) and Eilidh Rankin (Alice).





A version of this review appears in print on December 24, 2010, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;