Frank & Lola
7.0
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISIts title is an early tip-off that “Frank &amp; Lola” will be a new riff on Frankie and Johnny’s old troubles. Immortalized in The Times critic Manohla Dargis reviews "Frank &amp; Lola."That’s the idea, even if the two leads never make sense together. Still, that is the way their characters were written and so Frank (Mr. Shannon) fixes his sights on Lola (Ms. Poots) and doesn’t let go. A chef, he wines and dines her, and even meets her mother (a funny Rosanna Arquette, livening up the table). There are bumps, including those created by Frank, who switches into bad-boyfriend mode when he sees Lola talking with a stranger (Justin Long). He not only spies on Lola, he also pulls a Joe Pesci on her, asking, “Who was the mook?” Then Lola sleeps with someone else, which she blames on a past trauma.“Frank &amp; Lola” proves more about him than her. That’s partly because of the story, partly because the writer-director Matthew Ross doesn’t have a full handle on it or his actors. Mr. Shannon is an imposing screen presence and it’s easy for him to dominate his scenes, which happens too often here. It’s tough to see him and Ms. Poots as anything other than a match made in casting, especially as complications and feelings pile up. When Frank expresses his hurt, he doesn’t seem just wounded; he also comes off as a menace. And while Lola may like it like that, the appealing Ms. Poots never persuades you. Only when Emmanuelle Devos shows up in a Paris detour does Mr. Shannon find some ballast.A preview of the film.The story Mr. Ross has come up with suggests that he wants to say something about desire and jealousy, but he hasn’t given Frank enough of an inner life to make the character’s transformation from a besotted lover into a distrustful one plausible. Instead, Frank stares at Lola, broods, occasionally explodes, but all too often registers as an uninteresting jerk. Lola, meanwhile, weeps and explains and rapidly fades. Paradoxically, one of the strongest scenes happens early, when a newly acquainted Frank and Lola explore each other’s bodies as the jeweled Vegas skyline glows behind them. They fumble sexily, and it works.Mr. Ross, making his feature debut, succeeds best when he’s digging little tunnels away from his unhappy couple. He has an eye for locations and can thicken the atmosphere nicely, particularly when he leaves things unsaid. The Paris scenes involving Frank’s audition for a fancy chef’s job are unusual enough to be intriguing, convincing enough to draw you in. You believe the kitchen even when you don’t necessarily buy the knife skills. But when Frank begins stalking a man (Michael Nyqvist) from Lola’s past, the movie soon wildly overheats with a waving blade, grappling bodies, popping eyes and sinister French people who seem to have slunk in from another movie.





Frank &amp; LolaA version of this review appears in print on December 9, 2016, on Page C6 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;