A Million Ways to Die in the West
6.1
AdvertisementBy STEPHEN HOLDENThe Times critic Stephen Holden reviews “A Million Ways to Die in the West.”You can’t blame Seth MacFarlane, that one-man comedy juggernaut, for wanting to add movie star to his list of credentials. After all, he has succeeded beyond any sane person’s wildest dreams at building a comedy empire by holding a stinky finger to the racing pulse of the collective id.Like his fellow naughty boys Matt Stone and Trey Parker, who share his attitude of deadpan sarcasm, he knows full well that the human appetite for good-natured humor about bodily excretions and the messy area between the navel and the thighs is here to stay. It is primal farce, which, if we haven’t learned to accept it, will leave us permanently wrinkling our noses while the rest of the world goes on sniffing and chortling.And so we have Mr. MacFarlane playing Albert Stark, a cowering sheep farmer with a dirty mind, in his silly western spoof, A scene from “A Million Ways to Die in the West,” directed by Seth MacFarlane.It is also a descendant of the Bob Hope westerns “The Paleface” and “Son of Paleface,” Mr. MacFarlane being a disciple of Hope in spirit, if not in fact. Like Hope, Mr. MacFarlane is essentially a blank personality behind the facade of cynical, wisecracking toastmaster. As the host of the 2013 Oscars, Mr. MacFarlane presented himself as a potential Hope successor but lacked the comic timing and chutzpah to pull off the charade.AdvertisementLike Hope, Mr. MacFarlane implies that mischief can turn into mayhem at any second without letting his shell of bonhomie crack. It will take him years to build up the kind of good will that lent Hope’s presence an air of imperial unflappability that allowed him to transcend even the most embarrassing mishaps with the perfect wisecrack.AdvertisementSo does The myth debunking begins immediately, as Albert, a glaring misfit in the frontier town of Old Stump, complains to anyone who will listen how much he hates the West. “We live in a terrible place and time,” he declares. “Everything that’s not you wants to kill you.” When enemies pursue Albert, he cowers inside a flock of his sheep.If the plot of “A Million Ways to Die in the West” isn’t as helter-skelter as a typical episode of “Family Guy,” the movie is really still a live-action spinoff of that cartoon, with different characters. It stays more or less on track until Albert accidentally overdoses on a psychedelic potion during a powwow with some friendly Apaches.The story springs off Albert’s breakup with his longtime girlfriend, Louise (Amanda Seyfried, stuck in a thankless role), who dumps him when he walks away from a gunfight. Albert’s best friend, Edward (Giovanni Ribisi), is a prim, virginal shoe repairman whose girlfriend, Ruth (Sarah Silverman), is a prostitute who services up to 15 clients a day. With the chirp of a naïve schoolgirl reciting the day’s events to her parents, she regales Edward with graphic accounts of her sexual exploits, to which he registers no reaction. Ruth insists that she and Edward not consummate their relationship until marriage because they are good Christians.Charlize TheronA mustache, it turns out, is the ultimate male status symbol. Mr. Harris threatens to steal the movie with his portrayal of this vain, preening fop, a hissable baddie whose mug is plastered with a ridiculous, curling handlebar. That symbol even gets its own Broadway-style production number when a male chorus bursts into a revised version of Stephen Foster’s “The Moustache Song.”“A Million Ways to Die in the West” seems serious about only one thing: its contempt for the gun-crazed macho ethos exalted in countless Hollywood westerns. You might call the movie “Revenge of the Übernerd.”“A Million Ways to Die in the West” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian) for scatological humor.





A version of this review appears in print on May 30, 2014, on Page C6 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;