Dawn of the Planet of the Apes
7.6
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTMatt Reeves narrates a sequence from “Dawn of the Planet of the Apes,” featuring Jason Clarke.A quick montage at the beginning of But this is not “Dusk of the Planet of the Humans.” The spectacle of yet another desperate population, huddled together in the wake of catastrophe to await the next The sylvan, simian Athens in the Muir Woods is a remarkable achievement and an important part of what makes “Dawn of the Planet of the Apes,” directed by Matt Reeves from a script by Rick Jaffa, Amanda Silver and Mark Bomback, the best of this summer’s large-scale, big-studio franchise movies. Granted, this isn’t a very high bar to clear: “better than ‘Transformers 4’ ” barely counts as praise, even with an exclamation mark. But unlike that toy-smashing extravaganza — and unlike 2014’s visitations from the Starting with the apes themselves. In the final credits, The Times critic A. O. Scott reviews “Dawn of the Planet of the Apes.”Koba, a survivor of scientific experiments, bears the physical and moral scars of human cruelty. When the apes encounter a scouting party from the city (led by Jason Clarke and AdvertisementCaesar, who saw the generous, tender side of humanity when he was hanging out with Mr. Franco and Freida Pinto, is willing to give our kind the benefit of the doubt. There is plenty of evidence — both in the movie and beyond it — to support Koba’s view, but the film comes down squarely, and maybe a little too squishily, on the side of tolerance and cooperation. The ape and human societies are parallel primitive patriarchies (women nurture and worry, while men lead and fight, a disappointing but hardly surprising failure of imagination on the filmmakers’ part), and they are threatened by symmetrical schisms. As Koba opposes Caesar, so does Malcolm (Mr. Clarke’s character) find himself increasingly at odds with Dreyfus (Mr. Oldman), who sees the apes as a mortal threat to be confronted with maximum brutality.Actors from “Dawn of the Planet of the Apes” receive ape-like movement training near the film set in New Orleans.The arguments — in essence, about whether the boundaries of solidarity should stay within the tribe or extend beyond it — give “Dawn of the Planet of the Apes” a nice allegorical heft. The old movies, which blew the minds and troubled the sleep of many children in the ’60s and ’70s (including young Bobby Draper in Season 6 of AdvertisementAnd while In other words, it’s a satisfying movie and an example — a dispiritingly rare one these days — of what mainstream Hollywood filmmaking can still achieve. That we have progressed from “Rise” only as far as “Dawn” suggests many future sequels, which may, in this case, be a source of hope as well as dread, provided that civilization doesn’t collapse in the meantime.“Dawn of the Planet of the Apes” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Animal cruelty.





A version of this review appears in print on July 11, 2014, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;