Son of Rambow
7.0
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe spiritual godfather, as it were, of the comic British charmer A likable, lightly sticky valentine to childhood, the 1980s and the dawning of movie love, “Son of Rambow” was written and directed by Garth Jennings and produced by Nick Goldsmith, the duo behind the underappreciated fantasy In screen romance fashion, the two boys meet cute if somewhat cruelly. A member of a Christian sect  that forbids television, movies and apparently smiling, Will is quietly sitting in a school hallway (while the rest of his class takes in some audiovisual instruction), when Lee erupts into his field of vision like a bomb. Having been ushered out of his classroom rather more rudely than Will (and to the robust cheering of his fellow students), Lee instantly bounces a ball off the other boy’s unsuspecting head, creating a fatal attraction that starts off like Krazy Kat and Ignatz Mouse, and soon morphs into something far softer. (Lee throws the ball hard, but Mr. Jennings makes sure it doesn’t hurt too much.)What kicks the story into gear, turning two wary children into blood brothers, is Rambo. The movie-mad Lee, who lives with his negligent older brother, Lawrence (Ed Westwick), in a mausoleumlike manor next  to a nursing home (their absent mother is married to the facility’s owner), runs a steady video dubbing operation. He’s also making his own screen epic in hopes of winning a television contest. When this would-be DeMille accidentally introduces Will to Rambo, the image of the tough guy serves as a shock to the sheltered (and fatherless) boy.  Rambo — invincible, unyielding — liberates Will, exciting his already effulgent imagination and creating a bond with Lee, his first real friend. But Rambo also enslaves him, making this introspective loner hungry for friendship and film alike.AdvertisementWorking in a self-consciously quirky key that owes a strong debt to Wes Anderson’s “Son of Rambow” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Innocuous childish violence. SON OF RAMBOWOpens on Friday in New York and Los Angeles. Written and directed by Garth Jennings; director of photography, Jess Hall; edited by Dominic Leung; music by Joby Talbot; production designer, Joel Collins; produced by Nick Goldsmith; released by Paramount Vantage. Running time: 1 hour 36 minutes.WITH: Bill Milner (Will Proudfoot), Will Poulter (Lee Carter), Jessica Stevenson (Mary Proudfoot), Neil Dudgeon (Joshua), Jules Sitruk (Didier Revol) and Ed Westwick (Lawrence Carter).





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page E11 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;