Kung Fu Panda 2
7.3
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTIn “As Po tries to work out his issues, “Kung Fu Panda 2,” directed by Jennifer Yuh Nelson from a screenplay by Jonathan Aibel and Glenn Berger, succumbs to its own crippling confusion. The first “The upside of the “more” is that there is, once again, quite a lot of nice stuff to look at, an expanded palette of clever and sometimes beautiful visual effects. Like the first “Panda” picture — and like the intermittently sublime “The palaces and villages, the mountains and bamboo forestsAdvertisementVengeance and bloodshed figure prominently in many of those movies, and also, somewhat disconcertingly, in “Kung Fu Panda 2.” The villain, a peacock named Shen (with the reliably sinister voice of AdvertisementHave I spoiled anything? If you are 7, maybe. If not, I have spared you some uncomfortable explaining, and allowed you to reassure panicky children in your company that everything will be O.K. Everything always is in this kind of movie, but this one plays with some unusually dark and upsetting material.Its escalation of evil messes up the high-spirited sweetness that was the most winning feature of the first movie. Po’s clumsy, goofy eagerness no longer seems quite as amusing now that he is a psychologically damaged warrior. And his action-team entourage, drawn from various species of animal and movie star — praying mantis, tiger, monkey, etc; So all in all, “Kung Fu Panda 2” is about what you would expect, and its audience is likely to settle for it in the absence of a compelling alternative. (“I’ve seen hundreds of movies that were better than that one,” said my 7-year-old screening companion, as if reading my mind.) Early on, Po’s teacher, speaking in the gravelly tones of “Kung-Fu Panda 2” is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). The systematic extermination of an adorable species. Or not! KUNG FU PANDA 2Opens on Thursday nationwide. Directed by Jennifer Yuh Nelson; written by Jonathan Aibel and Glenn Berger; supervising animator and fight choreographer, Rudolphe Guenoden; music by Hans Zimmer and John Powell; production design by Raymond Zibach; produced by Melissa Cobb; released by Paramount Pictures and DreamWorks Animation. Running time: 1 hour 35 minutes.WITH THE VOICES OF: 





A version of this review appears in print on May 26, 2011, on Page C7 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;