Green Lantern
5.6
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISIt’s shocking how little $150 million buys you in Hollywood these days. That galactic sum is the estimated production price tag swinging from “The little weird creatures in the movie with the puckered heads certainly look as if they could use some hydration. Called the Guardians of the Universe, these are basically Yoda multiplied, wizened immortals who live on the planet Oa and were originally drawn to look like, no kidding, the first Israeli prime minister, David Ben-Gurion. In the movie, presumably select members perch on individual power towers and wear long robes that drape from their bodies like portable red carpets, regulation alien bobble heads who are part Mr. Burns, part Metamucil candidate. They dispense orders and gnomic wisdom to the Green Lantern Corps, an interplanetary transspecies force that patrols the universe like beat cops and soon includes the earthling Hal Jordan (Hal joins the Lanterns after being tapped by a dying alien and voicing the oath that characterizes him as much as his duds. (“In brightest day, in blackest night, no evil shall escape my sight.”)It’s a gig that comes with the familiar superperks like a damsel to rescue and a world to save, and is served up with the customary drawbacks, like a shiny (digital) unitard and villainy. First, though, Hal has to fight the usual demons (notably dear old dead Dad) to become the champion he was chosen to be, a task impeded by lame jokes; evocations of better movies (the 1970s “AdvertisementBored yet? I’ll try to snap it up better than the team behind “Green Lantern” did or maybe could. Fronting the production are the director The reason this matters to moviegoers is that if Warner Brothers doesn’t invest in quality — as it did with Christopher Nolan’s excellent Batman films — more substandard diversions like “Green Lantern” (and those previous DC big-screen bummers “And “Green Lantern” is bad. This AdvertisementIn comics, the Green Lantern has been through “Green Lantern” is rated PG-13. (Parents strongly cautioned). It has bloodless violence, including a scene of patricide that may be too intense for wee viewers.GREEN LANTERNOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on June 17, 2011, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;