Death at a Funeral
7.4
AdvertisementBy STEPHEN HOLDENAn effective farce is a comic contraption that largely runs on its own crude mechanics. The surprises and sight gags, however they are discharged, are more important than the actors and the direction.Casting is a matter of filling in blanks. Some comedians, when they slip on a banana peel, look more ridiculous than others. But it’s still a banana peel, and a pratfall is a pratfall. Making the whole creaky device run smoothly is mostly a matter of greasing the machinery.This slapdash remake of the 2007 film The wrong body is delivered to the home. The 4-foot-tall secret gay lover of the deceased appears with sexually explicit snapshots in hand and demands money. One nervous guest imbibes a powerful hallucinogen that he thinks is a tranquilizer, goes deliriously bonkers and ends up naked on the roof. A corpse noisily resurrects during the ceremony. There is obligatory scatology.AdvertisementThe 2010 “Death at a Funeral,” directed by Reining in his signature misanthropy, Mr. LaBute wisely avoids taking the Tyler Perry route of turning “Death at a Funeral” into a loud, knockabout carnival show. The acting, especially by He leads a high-profile cast of mostly African-American actors, who include Tracy Morgan plays Norman, a hypochondriacal family friend who helps Uncle Russell into a bathroom in which an excremental explosion takes place; this surefire gag had the preview audience screaming.Among three white cast members, James Marsden as the blissed-out victim of pharmaceutical confusion, and Peter Dinklage as the dead man’s diminutive boyfriend, Frank (he played the same character with a different name in the original movie), get the most comic mileage from their turns. Luke Wilson, in a thankless role, is lost.Think of “Death at a Funeral” as a comic quickie. As it presses buttons, a few laughs come out, but that’s all there is to it.“Death at a Funeral” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has scatological humor and male nudity.DEATH AT A FUNERALOpens on Friday  nationwide. Directed by WITH: Keith David (the Rev. Davis), Loretta Devine (Cynthia), Peter Dinklage (Frank), Ron Glass (Duncan), 





A version of this review appears in print on April 16, 2010, on Page C13 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;