47 Ronin
6.3
AdvertisementBy NICOLAS RAPOLDThe Times critic Nicolas Rapold reviews "47 Ronin."Between the prospect of Hollywood’s sexing up a legendary Japanese story with rampaging C.G.I. monsters and the eager reports of a Variations on the film’s grim source tale have been produced in Japan since the 18th century, including on the screen by the likes of Kenji Mizoguchi and Kon Ichikawa. It’s a culturally specific story perhaps destined for rewrites, at least when confronted with the bottom-line logic of keeping an American star front and center. Built into Providing fodder for fanciful special effects and 3-D imagery are a shape-shifting witch (Rinko Kikuchi, in an unsteady vamp), who helps Kira using extravagant conjurings, and a back story for Kai in an enchanted forest (apparently named after folkloric creatures called tengu). The lushly designed beasts and careening chases are what you might expect from the film’s director, Carl Rinsch, who is making his feature debut after creating advertising work and a viral short featuring, well, robots and chases. All these flourishes may reflect anxiety over whether the shame- and honor-based narrative would hold the attention of Americans, but they can be diverting.There’s a sober pace to this sometimes picturesque film: The dutifully arranged action building blocks and the meager story filler are ploddingly punctuated by landscape shots. But “47 Ronin” can’t entirely paper over the void at its center, traceable partly to the shadowboxing of computer-aided filmmaking or studio tinkering. (Reshoots reportedly occurred, with changes including the placement of Mr. Reeves’s character at the center of a climactic battle with a dragon.)Taken as a blithe exercise in fantasy with historical trappings, the skewed results feel more inevitable than disappointing. “47 Ronin” falls in with a long line of exotic entertainments that have periodically seized American screens since the age of serials, in which the maneuverings of adaptation almost feel like part of the drama.Advertisement“47 Ronin” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned) for scary samurai stuff (swordplay, suicide) and monstrous, bloodthirsty creatures doing their thing.




A version of this review appears in print on December 25, 2013, on Page C14 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;