Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides
6.7
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTIt is fitting that what passes for a plot in “Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides” involves a search for the fountain of youth. This film, the fourth in a series that made its improbable and profitable leap from the theme park to the multiplex eight summers ago, represents an attempt to rejuvenate a flagging franchise.Whether the effort was absolutely necessary is both an obvious and a naïve question. Why would the Walt Disney Company, which distributes these movies, and Jerry Bruckheimer, who produces them, ever want to leave well enough alone? In Hollywood, gratuitous excess — not necessity — is the mother of invention.Not that “On Stranger Tides” is especially inventive. Gore Verbinski, who directed the first three installments with wanton energy, rococo visual flair and a flagrant disregard for narrative coherence, has been replaced by Mr. Verbinski, whose sensibility owes more to the naughty, anarchic Warner Brothers and MGM cartoons of the 1940s and ’50s than to the Disney tradition, made a successful transition to full-blown animation with “AdvertisementA lot of the original cast members and special guest stars have fallen away — Keith Richards shows up for a minute or two, less thrillingly than the last time — but the guys up front are still in good shape, and a few more old-timers have been recruited from elsewhere to add their seasoned chops.AdvertisementRichard Griffiths has a fleshy, wiggy cameo as King George, and Judi Dench appears briefly as a lady in a carriage, but the movie belongs to the power trio of Mr. Depp, Geoffrey Rush (as his sometime nemesis Barbossa) and Keira Knightley and Orlando Bloom are hardly missed, as the filmmakers — Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio are the credited screenwriters — wisely turn the movie over to the gamy supporting players. There are a pair of young people in love, one of them a missionary (Sam Claflin), the other a mermaid (Astrid Bergès-Frisbey), but their wooing is incidental to the mugging and bellowing and occasional swordplay among Sparrow, Blackbeard and Barbossa. It’s almost as if a “But the name Jerry Bruckheimer in the opening titles mean that things must explode — a huge tank of whale oil, most memorably — and that there must be chases, crashes and leaps through the air. With an early exception involving a cream puff and a chandelier, these action sequences are handled more as instances of duty than occasions for play.And I almost forgot to mention the 3-D, for good and bad reasons. The good one is that the format is mostly unobtrusive: you barely notice it unless a sword is sticking out of the screen or “On Stranger Tides” never lives up to — or, for that matter, does anything to deserve — the recent parody tribute offered by Michael Bolton in a But like ““Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Some fantasy-horror violence.PIRATES OF THE CARIBBEAN: ON STRANGER TIDESOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by AdvertisementWITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on May 20, 2011, on Page C8 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;