The Untouchables
7.9
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTT“Les Intouchables,” having broken box office records in France, arrives in the United States with a faithfully translated title — “The Intouchables” — that is not quite English. American audiences looking for a suitable French name for this ingratiating comedy of cross-racial friendship might settle on “Déjà Vu,” since it is a story we have seen many times before.Though maybe not quite like this, or at least not in a while. “The Intouchables,” directed by But anyway. The pallid aristocrat, Philippe (Dennis Lim looks at some of the noteworthy performances of the summer movies season.How does Driss do this? In the usual ways. He flirts shamelessly with the boss’s secretary and gives Philippe’s daughter the stern talking-to she needs. He introduces Philippe to the pleasures of AdvertisementIt is possible to summarize the experience of watching “The Intouchables” in nine words: You will laugh; you will cry; you will cringe. The caricatures are astonishingly brazen, as ancient comic archetypes — a pompous master and a clowning servant right out of Molière — are updated with vague social relevance, an overlay of Hollywood-style sentimentality and a conception of race that might kindly be called cartoonish.AdvertisementYou can easily imagine this movie — you probably have already seen it — with Richard Pryor or Eddie Murphy in Mr. Sy’s role. In the post-civil-rights, post-blaxploitation era, entertainments based on the clash of white squareness and black soul had a certain novelty and charm. Nowadays they are more likely to be layered with self-consciousness, winking at their own conventions. (See, for example, In the old days the French view of America’s race problem (as it used to be called) was tinged with pity and superiority. African-American artists and intellectuals — Josephine Baker, Richard Wright, James Baldwin and too many jazz musicians to name — went to Paris to find respect and relief from the bigotry at home, and many contemporary French observers took this fact as confirmation of their own country’s relative innocence. More recently, as France has grappled with immigration and its rapidly evolving identity as a multicultural society, such smugness has dropped away, and much of the best recent French film and literature grapples earnestly with this new situation.The New York Times film critics on “Men in Black 3,” “Moonrise Kingdom,” and “The Intouchables.”What “The Intouchables” does cannot exactly be called grappling, and its genial parade of stereotypes may be more regressive than liberating. It is certainly possible to be offended by the broad, silly aspects of Mr. Sy’s performance. An English-language remake might be perfect for Tracy Jordan of “30 Rock,” the star of such nonexistent, barely exaggerated It is too much to say that he and Mr. Cluzet, a crafty and insightful actor, rescue “The Intouchables.” They do provide it with humanity and idiosyncrasy — with the sense that Philippe and Driss might be real people rather than sociological ciphers — but this film can only be described, in the context of French cinema and global popular culture, as an embarrassment.Given its subject, embarrassment may be both inevitable and forgivable. Race, in France as in the United States, is a perpetual source of confusion and discomfort; to address it is always, in some way, to get it wrong. “The Intouchables” sets out to convert that anxiety into easy laughter and also, like “The Help” and “The Intouchables” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). Sex, drugs, funky music.





A version of this review appears in print on May 25, 2012, on Page C7 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;