2012
5.8
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISI know what I have against Roland Emmerich — Maybe he’s angry. (His last movie, And so the dust swirls in “2012,” and debris and bodies fly, though at a careful distance. It all looks fairly convincing and also familiar: if you don’t repeatedly flash on Sept. 11, Mr. Emmerich will surely be disappointed. That gives the movie a cheap frisson, though the larger shivers are supplied by the onslaught of pricey special effects, which have grown predictably snazzier since his last cataclysm. Alas, the clichés of the disaster narrative remain in place. To that ruinous end, the larger catastrophe in “2012” functions as both the trigger and backdrop for a soap opera about a fractured family, standing in for the rest of humanity, which heals as the world falls apart. That’s the idea, anyway.In truth, the central family here is as disposable as the billions of computer-generated humans that soon pile up after disaster hits. Written by Mr. Emmerich and Harald Kloser (they last collaborated on “10,000 B.C.”), “2012” takes its plot points and shifting plates from both science and fiction, and its title from doomsday prophesies, including a myth about the end of days derived from a reading of the Mayan calendar. Though not much is made of the Mayan angle, the most amusing character, a doomsday prophet and radio broadcaster played by AdvertisementMr. Harrelson looks like he’s actually having the kind of good time stupid movies should provide but that this one roundly fails to deliver. Despite the frenetic action scenes, the movie sags, done in by multiple story lines that undercut one another and by the heaviness of its conceit. Humanity is dying, after all, as the television talking heads keep repeating, and while most of the dead are specks on the screen, Mr. Emmerich occasionally brings you close to the calamity. In one scene a musician (George Segal) calls his estranged son, but the phone is answered by the granddaughter he’s never seen. She’s cute, but then her house shakes and she’s gone, vaporized so that a sob can catch in Mr. Segal’s throat and ours.AdvertisementThere’s no time for real tears in movies of this sort, of course, though there’s plenty of space available for synergistic product placement, as evidenced by the Sony Vaio equipment that fills the government offices where the American president (Chiwetel Ejiofor“2012” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Old Testament-style destruction served with a smile.2012Opens on Friday nationwide.Directed by Roland Emmerich; written
by Mr. Emmerich and Harald Kloser;
director of photography, Dean Semler;
edited by David Brenner and Peter S.
Elliot; music by Mr. Kloser and Thomas
Wander; visual-effects supervisors,
Volker Engel and Marc Weigert; production
designer, Barry Chusid; produced
by Mr. Kloser, Mark Gordon and
Larry Franco; released by Columbia
Pictures. Running time: 2 hours 38 minutes.WITH: John Cusack (Jackson Curtis),
Chiwetel Ejiofor (Adrian Helmsley),
Amanda Peet (Kate Curtis), Oliver Platt
(Carl Anheuser), Thandie Newton (Laura
Wilson), Danny Glover (President
Thomas Wilson), Woody Harrelson
(Charlie Frost), George Segal (Tony Delgatto),
Tom McCarthy (Gordon Silberman),
Liam James (Noah Curtis), Morgan
Lily (Lilly Curtis), Chin Han (Tenzin)
and Osric Chau (Nima).





A version of this review appears in print on November 13, 2009, on Page C9 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;