The Hunger Games: Catching Fire
7.6
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe Times critic Manohla Dargis reviews “The Hunger Games: Catching Fire.”When “Catching Fire” is the follow-up to “A thrillingly atypical heroine, Katniss is the heart, soul and bloodied embodiment of the series and the primary reason that both the book and screen versions soar above the usual adventure-fiction slag heap. Like most cultural sensations, which invariably owe part of their success to their recognizability (familiarity breeds revenue), “The Hunger Games” builds on stories deep in our collective databanks, from the Greek myth of the Minotaur to the fall of Rome, and “Survivor,” the seemingly indestructible reality TV franchise. Like the 2000 Japanese movie “Battle Royale,” to which it bears some resemblance, “The Hunger Games” works because it hits that sweet spot where classical myth meets contemporary anxiety to become a pop mind-blower.Like a lot of middle sections, “Catching Fire” at once expands on the first part of the series and functions as a feature-long teaser for what will happen next. Shortly after the movie gets going, after Katniss has stashed away a rabbit from one of her snares and cozied up to Gale (Liam Hemsworth), one of her uneasy love interests (she’s the reluctant party), she is sent on a victory tour with the second one, Peeta (Josh Hutcherson). In the first “Hunger Games,” Katniss and Peeta won the annual contest of the title, a match that pits a girl and a boy, 12 to 18, from each of the 12 Panem districts against one another in a battle to the death, a setup that speaks to its young adult fans and takes adolescent bullying to gladiatorial extremes.AdvertisementMetaphors aside, the games are principally a heavy stick that Panem, led by President Snow (an amused Donald Sutherland), uses to keep the progressively restive populace in check. President Snow is the big bad daddy of the series, the patriarchal heavy whom Katniss — who more or less took her own father’s place, after he died — is destined to overthrow. Something is in the air, she realizes in “Catching Fire,” when she glimpses seditious graffiti and other signs of dissent.For now, though, as the story builds and builds and sometimes drags, and the studio squeezes the franchise for all it’s worth, Katniss primarily needs to irritate Snow, which finds Ms. Lawrence throwing variations of her scowl in Mr. Sutherland’s direction, while his caterpillar eyebrows jitterbug above his trademark silky-sinister smirk.The AdvertisementThere, on a simulated island created by the new head gamemaster (an uncomfortable-looking Mr. Hoffman), Katniss and Peeta make friends as they fight foes and endure buckets of blood, poisonous fog, shrieking monkeys and, in a scarily visceral scene, birds that mimic the voices and screams of the combatants’ loved ones, as if they were under torture.Mr. Lawrence gives “Catching Fire” a tougher, less sentimental feel this time around — there appears to be more kissing but less mooning about — that fits the material and Ms. Lawrence’s gift for projecting unaffected indomitableness. The actress is more expressive here than she was in the first movie, where her lack of convincing affect, including clenching fear, was at odds with the violent stakes. There’s no indeterminacy here, either in her performance or the direction, which both go a long way to clarifying Katniss and turning a girl with a bow into the charismatic figure she was always meant to be. (It’s nice, too, that the consistently appealing Elizabeth Banks, as the kaleidoscopic kook Effie Trinket, is allowed to deliver an actual performance this time.)“Catching Fire” isn’t a great work of art but it’s a competent, at times exciting movie and it does something that better, more artistically notable movies often fail to do: It speaks to its moment in time. “The mythic America,” the literary critic Leslie Fiedler memorably wrote, “is boyhood.” One of the things that “The Hunger Games,” on the page and on the screen, suggests is that the myth is changing. Boys (and men) are still boys, of course, including in movies, but the very existence of Katniss — who fights her own battles, and kisses and leaves the boys, only sometimes to save them — suggests cultural consumers are ready for change, even if most cultural producers remain foolishly stuck in the past. It’s unlikely Katniss will lead the real revolution the movies need, but a woman can dream.“The Hunger Games: Catching Fire” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Murder and mayhem.





A version of this review appears in print on November 22, 2013, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;