Blood Diamond
8.0
AdvertisementBy MANOHLA DARGISThe makers of “Blood Diamond,” an exceptionally foolish thriller starring a most excellent Mr. DiCaprio plays Danny Archer, a Rhodesian-born diamond smuggler  who, having been orphaned during his native country’s violent struggles in the 1970s, has spent most of his 30-some years crisscrossing the continent as a soldier of fortune and a merchant of misery. Tousled and tanned, with a long, slicing gait and a killer smile, Danny looks as if he were born for trouble of the sweetest kind. But Mr. DiCaprio, perhaps because he knows that much of the audience has already crawled into his pocket, plays the smuggler as the scum he is.  Even as the film coaxes Danny toward redemption, the actor fights to hold his ground and the truth of a character who has inspired the most fully sustained performance of his adult life.This being an The chase is on, and on. Written by Charles Leavitt, “Blood Diamond” more or less plays like an exotically situated action flick as each man races toward his respective goal. Solomon hopes to reunite with his wife and three children, from whom he has been violently separated; Danny just wants a score big enough to pay his way permanently out of Africa. Theirs might be a match made in movie-genre heaven if the filmmakers didn’t insist  on wagging their fingers in our faces and delivering dire statistics by the ream, the intimations of Antwerp intrigue and an American journalist, Maddy Bowen (AdvertisementIf the sociopolitical context weren’t so appalling,  this ludicrous characterization and Ms. Connelly’s equally woeful performance would be easy to laugh off. But both are insulting because they transpire against a backdrop of human suffering, suffering that Maddy sternly lectures Danny for exploiting even as she snaps another photograph of the very same. (Say what!?) Any question that the filmmakers might be clued into Maddy’s cluelessness, might be directly engaging the contradictions involved whenever misery becomes fodder for entertainment, is answered by the documentarylike images of children roaming a mound of garbage, by the blank-looking men and women sitting in trash-strewn streets and by the periodically brandished arm and leg stumps. The horror, the horror.Like “Blood Diamond” means well, but it also means box-office business. Hollywood has always traveled to faraway places (or at least tricked out sound stages) to spin yarns about moral calamity perfumed with the exotic. Whether down Mexico way or in Morocco, it generally kept the atmospheric extras — the snake-hipped dancing girl, the scoundrel in the burnoose, the smiler in the fez — stashed in the background, where they wouldn’t distract from the star attractions. “Blood Diamond” wants to bring those blurred figures closer into view, notably through Solomon. But the rushing camerawork, breakneck editing, compulsion to go, go, go onto the next genre beat mean that there is next to no time for such niceties. The faces remain obscured, the voices muted, even as Danny comes sharply into focus.AdvertisementThe tragedy of Sierra Leone and the complicity of Americans, who buy more diamonds than any other consumers in the world, deserve louder, more clamorous attention than the occasional news report.  And certainly big-budget Hollywood action films are plenty loud and plenty clamorous, and the volume is only    turned up to shrieking with the addition of the international heartthrob who, by sacrificing himself on the altar of love in Yet while Mr. DiCaprio turns out to be an ideal fit for “Blood Diamond,” there’s an insolvable disconnect between this serious story and the frivolous way it has been told. There is no reason to doubt the filmmakers’ sincerity; only their filmmaking.“Blood Diamond” is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). The film includes scenes of extreme violence, some of which involve child soldiers. BLOOD DIAMONDOpens today nationwide. Directed by WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on , on Page E1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;