Sherlock Holmes: A Game of Shadows
7.5
Advertisement A.&nbsp;O. SCOTTRobert Downey Jr. is currently carrying two movie franchises — the Marvel Can a movie be hyperactive and lazy at the same time? Clever and idiotic? If the director is What a shame. Arthur Conan Doyle’s detective, with his violin, his deerstalker and his steel-trap mind, has been one of the most resilient and adaptable figures in Anglophone popular culture. He has been updated, travestied and conscripted into preposterous tales so many times — including by Doyle himself — that it is silly to hold his character sacred, or to scold Mr. Ritchie for taking liberties. But you would think that a man of such reputed brilliance and erudition (I’m talking about Holmes) would at least know how to pronounce the word Not that thinking is in any way relevant. There are a few dabs of sophistication — the witty, walrussy presence of Stephen Fry as Mycroft Holmes, Sherlock’s brother; a disquisition on Schubert’s great lieder and a morsel of Mozart’s Rachel McAdamsAdvertisementPoor Sherlock. He is so desperate for attention, so needy — perhaps because of the competition from the likes of Tom Cruise and Tintin — that you are likely to reach the point of exasperation long before Watson does.“Sherlock Holmes: A Game of Shadows” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It includes fisticuffs, explosions, naughty innuendo.SHERLOCK HOLMESA Game of ShadowsOpens on Friday nationwide. Directed by WITH: Robert Downey Jr. (Sherlock Holmes), 





Sherlock Holmes:
A Game of Shadows
Opens on Friday nationwide.
Directed by Guy Ritchie; written by Michele
Mulroney and KieranMulroney,
based on characters created by Arthur
Conan Doyle; director of photography,
Philippe Rousselot; edited by James Herbert;
music by Hans Zimmer; production
design by Sarah Greenwood; costumes
by Jenny Beavan; produced by Joel Silver,
Lionel Wigram, Susan Downey and
Dan Lin; released by Warner Brothers
Pictures. Running time: 2 hours 9 minutes.
WITH: Robert Downey Jr. (Sherlock
Holmes), Jude Law (Dr. John Watson),
Noomi Rapace (Madam Simza Heron),
Rachel McAdams (Irene Adler), Jared
Harris (Professor James Moriarty), Eddie
Marsan (Inspector Lestrade) and Stephen
Fry (Mycroft Holmes).A version of this review appears in print on December 16, 2011, on Page C17 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;