Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade
8.3
LEAD: Before Indiana Jones can team up with his father to elude the Nazis and race them to the Holy Grail, he must travel halfway around the world. He leaves the cozy American campus where he teaches archeology, guides a beautiful woman through a rat-infested tunnel in Venice and makes his way to a castle swarming with Nazis on the Austrian-German border.
Before Indiana Jones can team up with his father to elude the Nazis and race them to the Holy Grail, he must travel halfway around the world. He leaves the cozy American campus where he teaches archeology, guides a beautiful woman through a rat-infested tunnel in Venice and makes his way to a castle swarming with Nazis on the Austrian-German border. There, Indiana swashbuckles his way into the room where Henry Jones is held prisoner and finds his tweedy, academic, mildly befuddled Dad. ''Junior?'' asks Sean Connery, and Harrison Ford answers, with years of exasperation behind him, ''Don't call me that, please.''

Steven Spielberg leads up to this meeting in ''Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade'' as if Mr. Connery himself were a great prize that must be earned by feats of daring. And no wonder, for the duet between father and son, and between two actors who always seem to have mischief in their eyes, is the brilliant twist on which the film will live or die. The very idea of Mr. Connery as Indiana's father already seems too delicious to be true. Beyond that, ''The Last Crusade'' aims to be a gigantic finale to the Indiana Jones trilogy. That's a lot of promise and hype to live up to.

Though it cannot regain the brash originality of ''Raiders of the Lost Ark,'' in its own way ''The Last Crusade'' is nearly as good, matching its audience's wildest hopes. Like the two previous films, also directed by Mr. Spielberg, this is one long, boisterous adventure, full of storms at sea, exploding boats and breathless escapes. But Mr. Connery's presence gives resonance to Indiana's life and a slightly slower pace and deeper shading to the film. This is the ultimate quest movie, each discovery leading to a new search - for the father, for the Grail, for faith.

The film's quests-within-quests start with a search for Indiana's own past. River Phoenix plays Indiana as a Boy Scout in Utah in 1912, in a delightful sequence that shows how the movie's formula turns in on itself. By now, Indiana's quirks are so familiar that audiences can revel in the witty hints tossed out about the hero.

Young Indiana sees scavengers stealing a sacred 16th-century relic, and determines to get it back, setting off on a series of adventures he hasn't quite mastered yet. He meets lions and rhinos and snakes, tries to jump from a cliff onto a horse, acquires his hat and whip and the tag line he uses in times of crisis, ''I'll think of something.'' The self-contained episode is a clue to how deftly Mr. Spielberg works in ''The Last Crusade,'' playing off our awareness of the Indiana Jones formula yet always playing it straight.

When the story leaps ahead to 1938, we discover that the medievalist Henry Jones has disappeared during a search for the Grail. Indiana rescues his father from the Nazis, who know Henry is about to find the Grail, and together they continue the search by zeppelin, plane and motorcycle. They waltz through a book-burning rally in Berlin, and wind up in a Middle Eastern desert where Indiana on horseback overtakes a German tank. Finally, they enter a magnificent temple carved into the face of a cliff.

Throughout this relentless action, the film keeps sight of the contentious but charming relationship between Indiana and his father. If Mr. Connery had done a star-turn, playing Sean-Connery-as-the-father, the entire fantasy would have collapsed. Here he escapes into Henry, who may be as stuffy as Indiana is reckless, but who has passed on a great deal of stubborness to his son.

They are a neat match, Indiana on a motorcycle and Henry in the sidecar, arguing at a crossroads about whether to turn right and save their old friend Marcus (Denholm Elliott) or turn left to go after the Grail. While they talk, the Nazis are racing up behind them.

And if it seems strange that Henry's briefcase and umbrella survive their plane's crash landing, that detail is at least true to the illogic of the adventure genre. The umbrella becomes an unlikely weapon, as Henry saves their lives in a fussy, endearing way that outsmarts and impresses his son.

With all its emotional overtones, this is the Indiana Jones film that shows Mr. Spielberg's signature most plainly. He is, after all, the director who practically dared audiences not to cry at E. T's death scene. But here he undercuts emotion with humor. ''We never talked,'' Indiana says about his childhood, and Henry explains, ''You left just when you were becoming interesting.''

Mr. Ford's role is more diffuse than it was in ''Raiders'' or in the overactive, gruesome sequel, ''Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom.'' He swerves among action, sentiment and cartoonish lines like, ''Nazis! I hate those guys!'' In Venice, he has a brief, James Bondish fling with his father's former assistant, just after he tells her: ''Leave me alone! I don't like fast women!'' But Mr. Ford accommodates each shift, for this role fits him as perfectly as the fedora that gives him his 1930's heroic look.

The ending in the temple is suffused with magical events that may well be miracles of faith. The most elaborate special effects are saved for this magisterial climax, which takes itself a touch too seriously, as the Earth opens and ancient secrets are revealed. Religious imagery dominates right down to the film's last glorious shot of four horsemen riding off into an apocalyptic sunset.

Jeffrey Boam's screenplay for ''Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade,'' which opens today at Loew's Astor Plaza and other theaters, cannot match the wit of Lawrence Kasdan's script for ''Raiders.'' Yet of the three Jones films, ''The Last Crusade'' may well become the sentimental favorite, the Indiana to end them all. 

''Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade'' is rated PG-13 (''Special Parental Guidance Suggested for Those Younger Than 13''). In addition to the tunnel of rats, there is a relentless sequence of violent Nazi deaths. 
Derring-do for Two 
INDIANA JONES AND THE LAST CRUSADE, directed by Steven Spielberg; screenplay by Jeffrey Boam, story by George Lucas and Menno Meyjes; director of photography, Douglas Slocombe; edited by Michael Kahn; music by John Williams; production designer, Elliot Scott; produced by Robert Watts; released by Paramount Pictures. At Loews Astor Plaza, west of Broadway; Loews 34th Street Showplace, between Second and Third Avenues, and other theaters. 
Indiana Jones ... Harrison Ford 
Prof. Henry Jones ... Sean Connery 
Marcus Brody ... Denholm Elliott 
Elsa ... Alison Doody 
Sallah ... John Rhys-Davies 
Walter Donovan ... Julian Glover 
Young Indy ... River Phoenix 
Vogel ... Michael Byrne