Things to Come
6.7
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTTHere are a few things to argue about, if you need distraction from all the other arguments going on right now. The last question, with its echo of Aristotle, might be of interest to Nathalie, Ms. Huppert’s character in A preview of the film.In the course of the movie, all of that will collapse, in ways that are both perfectly ordinary and utterly catastrophic. Nathalie loses her mother (Édith Scob) and her husband, Heinz (André Marcon), a fellow philosopher who has fallen in love with someone else. There are troubles on the professional front as well, including some awful meetings with the dynamic and innovative crew of young cretins who seem to have taken over the operations of Nathalie’s longtime publisher.Not everything is terrible, and Nathalie is too stoical, too analytical and too much of an ironist to engage in self-pity. She has mostly warm relationships with her grown children — and a new grandchild in the picture — and an intriguing, unsettling friendship with a talented former student named Fabien (Roman Kolinka). The possibility of romance hovers in the air between them like a theoretical construct trying to break into reality.Ms. Hansen-Love observes the vagaries of Nathalie’s situation with compassion and lucidity. Her films — this is her fourth feature — often turn on intimate calamities, like a husband’s suicide (in It also might stand as an admission of the filmmaker’s personal perspective on the story she is telling. Ms. Hansen-Love is 35, and the future she imagines is in some measure her own. Middle age is a landscape that is especially difficult for young people to picture, and one that they often ignore. It looks so sad, so boring, so scary, and the people who live there tend to be so weird and self-conscious. Ms. Hansen-Love surveys the territory with clear eyes, but also with an unmistakable shading of pity and with ideas, in particular about Nathalie’s sexuality and the political compromises of her generation, that seem more like assumptions than insights.AdvertisementIf Ms. Hansen-Love’s film overcomes these limitations, it’s because of Ms. Huppert, whose best performances often feel like dialogues — or outright arguments — with her directors. In a recent article in The New Republic, the critic Traveling from Paris to the countryside (where Fabien and some friends have set up a sort of anarchist commune), Nathalie finds herself both freer than she used to be and constrained by norms and expectations of which she had been only partly aware. Her identity has come unraveled, and she needs to figure out how to put together a new one, at once an ideal and an especially difficult project for a philosopher. It is also, of course, what actors do all the time, but almost never with Ms. Huppert’s combination of unbridled instinct and absolute control. Nathalie reinvents herself before our eyes, and we believe what we see because Ms. Huppert is doing it too.“Things to Come” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned) for grown-up feelings





A version of this review appears in print on December 2, 2016, on Page C5 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;