Iron Man 2
7.0
AdvertisementBy A. O. SCOTT“Iron Man 2,”But sometimes — for instance in the recent Spider-Man, X-Men and Batman cycles —  the second time is a charm, as filmmakers and actors use the reasonable certainty of financial success to take chances and explore odd corners of their archetypal, juvenile stories. “Iron Man 2,” directed by Mr. Favreau and Mr. Theroux are both accomplished actors — in “Iron Man 2” Mr. Favreau again plays Iron Man’s nebbishy gopher — and they have in effect turned this movie over to its game and talented cast. It’s not that the action sequences are badly executed; they just aren’t very interesting. The suits and explosions and C.G.I. flight simulations may have cost a lot of money, but more imagination has been invested in the film’s sleek and shiny look and, above all, in its jittery, loquacious and eccentric population of geniuses, frauds, playboys and bad guys.At the head of this crew — and playfully keeping everyone guessing as to just which of those categories he fits into — is Mr. Downey, his restless features keeping Stark’s lounge-lizard facial hair in a state of perpetual animation, has a way of turning action-hero duty into a form of intellectual comedy. As fast as his body and mouth might move, his brain is even quicker. He has the rare and marvelous capacity to surprise himself, which is one reason, even in a noisy dud like AdvertisementBut though Tony is a narcissist — he admits as much when a psychological profile tells him so — Mr. Downey is happy to share attention with any actor possessing the nerve and verve to try and keep up with him.AdvertisementGwyneth PaltrowIn addition to his Girl Friday, Stark also has a nemesis, a sidekick (Don Cheadle, replacing Terrence Howard) and a designated heel. The heel is a rival armaments mogul named Justin Hammer, played with a sublime mixture of pomposity and cluelessness by Sam Rockwell. Hammer is Daffy Duck to Stark’s Bugs Bunny, forever trying to outdo his competitor and discovering new registers of pique and humiliation every time he falls short.Which would make There are, I suppose, viewers who will regard the comic filigree of “Iron Man 2” — and I haven’t even mentioned Clark Gregg’s deadpan secret agent or Garry Shandling’s bloated senator — as diverting or distracting filler deposited between action sequences and plot revelations. I take the opposite view. A bunch of guys in metal suits slugging it out in a park in Queens? I can probably find that on pay-per-view or even YouTube. And the plot of “Iron Man 2” is frankly a bit of a hash, as Stark’s two-front conflict with Hammer and Vanko competes with exposition that will only pay off (meagerly, I suspect) in later sequels.Such preparation is one reason that “Iron Man 2” is rated PG-13. It has swearing, mayhem, discreet bloodshed and sexual innuendo.IRON MAN 2Opens on Friday nationwide. Directed by WITH: 





A version of this review appears in print on May 7, 2010, on Page C1 of the We&#8217;re interested in your feedback on this page. Go to Home Page &raquo;